md/00_Colophon.md, before:

---
Pr-id: Publications  
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 16  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: Online Courship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, H.G. Cocks, Murat Akser, Ramón Reichert, Diego Basile, Joaquín Linne, Lázaro M. Bacallao Pino, Cláudia Casimiro, Pascal Lardellier, Caiyun Wen, Sheena Raja and Bryce J. Renninger, Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi, David Levin, Gabriele de Seta, Ge Zhang, Tao Fu, Aras Ozgun, Megan Lindsay, Enver Ozustun. 
Author-email: alevdegim@siu.edu
Author-bio: about the author  
Editor: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu
Abstract: Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives. 
The research decodes the approach to online dating in various countries like France, India, China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.   
Keywords: online dating, social media, Institute of Network Cultures, print on demand, digital media, media theory, sociology, humanities, new media, France, India, China, Portugal, USA, methodologies, match.com, courtship, traditional, differences, Turkey, interactions, romantic, partners, search, love, facebook. 
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...

# Online Courtship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders

Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives.<br/>
The research decodes the level of engagement and manner of 
approaching online dating in various countries such as France, India, 
China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the 
introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.


# Colophon

Theory on Demand #16  
**Online Courtship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders**


**Editors:** I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu<br/>
**Copy-editing:** Jess van Zyl<br/>
**Editorial support:** Miriam Rasch<br/>

**Design:** Jess van Zyl<br/>
**EPUB development:** Jess van Zyl, Gottfried Haider<br/> 

**Printer:** Print on Demand<br/>
**Publisher:** Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2015<br/>
**ISBN:** 978-90-822345-7-2<br/> 


**Contact**

Institute of Network Cultures<br/> 
Phone: +3120 5951865<br/>
Email: info@networkcultures.org<br/>
Web: <http://www.networkcultures.org><br/>

This publication is available through various print on demand services.</br> 
For more information, and a freely downloadable PDF:<br/> 
<http://networkcultures.org/publications>

This publication is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0).<br/>
![](imgs/INC-logo.png)


# Contents

Introduction<br/>

The Pre-History of Print and Online Dating, c. 1690-1990<br/>

Old and New Methods for Online Research: The Case of Online Dating<br/>

Dating Maps: Mapping Love in Online Dating Communities<br/>

The Virtual Nightclub: Adolescents from Low-Income Sectors Search for Their Couples through Facebook<br/>

'Dating' or 'Escaping'? Cuban Profiles in Dating Websites<br/>

Self-presentation in the Portuguese Online Dating Scene: Does Gender Matter?<br/>

Liberalism Conquering Love: Reports and Reflections on Mass Romantic and Sexual Consumption in the Internet Age<br/>

The Advertising and Profit Model of Leading Dating Sites in China: A Comparison of Jianyuan, Baihe and Zhenai's Targeting and Advertising<br/>

Remediating the Matchmaker: Arranging Marriage Online in the South Asian Diasora in America<br/>

From Arranged to Online: A Study of Courtship Culture in India<br/>

The Role of Places and Symbols: A Cultural Interpretation of the On-line Dating Experience in Israel<br/>

Stranger Stranger or Lonley Lonely? Young Chinese and Dating Apps Between the Locational, the Mobile and the Social<br/>

What are the *Shengv* Looking for in Online Heterosexual Dating and Courtship? A Content Analysis of Shanghainese Women's Personal Profiles on Jiayuan.com<br/>

Keeping it Unreal - Online Dating with Chinese Characteristics<br/>

Talking to Strangers: Temporality, Identity and Politics in Live Webcam Sex Channels<br/>

Performative Acts of Gender in Online Dating: An Auto-ethnography Comparing Sites<br/>

Media's Effect on Online Dating Practices: Turkish TV Marriage Programs and Online Dating as a Medium<br/>
<br/>

Commit message:

updated Colophon metadata to include license for using Open Sans

md/00_Colophon.md, after:

---
Pr-id: Publications  
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 16  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: Online Courship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, H.G. Cocks, Murat Akser, Ramón Reichert, Diego Basile, Joaquín Linne, Lázaro M. Bacallao Pino, Cláudia Casimiro, Pascal Lardellier, Caiyun Wen, Sheena Raja and Bryce J. Renninger, Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi, David Levin, Gabriele de Seta, Ge Zhang, Tao Fu, Aras Ozgun, Megan Lindsay, Enver Ozustun. 
Author-email: alevdegim@siu.edu
Author-bio: about the author  
Editor: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu
Abstract: Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives. 
The research decodes the approach to online dating in various countries like France, India, China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.   
Keywords: online dating, social media, Institute of Network Cultures, print on demand, digital media, media theory, sociology, humanities, new media, France, India, China, Portugal, USA, methodologies, match.com, courtship, traditional, differences, Turkey, interactions, romantic, partners, search, love, facebook. 
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)

Font(s) used: Open Sans

Copyright 2015 Steve Matteson & GoogleFonts

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
...

# Online Courtship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders

Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives.<br/>
The research decodes the level of engagement and manner of 
approaching online dating in various countries such as France, India, 
China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the 
introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.


# Colophon

Theory on Demand #16  
**Online Courtship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders**


**Editors:** I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu<br/>
**Copy-editing:** Jess van Zyl<br/>
**Editorial support:** Miriam Rasch<br/>

**Design:** Jess van Zyl<br/>
**EPUB development:** Jess van Zyl, Gottfried Haider<br/> 

**Printer:** Print on Demand<br/>
**Publisher:** Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2015<br/>
**ISBN:** 978-90-822345-7-2<br/> 


**Contact**

Institute of Network Cultures<br/> 
Phone: +3120 5951865<br/>
Email: info@networkcultures.org<br/>
Web: <http://www.networkcultures.org><br/>

This publication is available through various print on demand services.</br> 
For more information, and a freely downloadable PDF:<br/> 
<http://networkcultures.org/publications>

This publication is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0).<br/>
![](imgs/INC-logo.png)


# Contents

Introduction<br/>

The Pre-History of Print and Online Dating, c. 1690-1990<br/>

Old and New Methods for Online Research: The Case of Online Dating<br/>

Dating Maps: Mapping Love in Online Dating Communities<br/>

The Virtual Nightclub: Adolescents from Low-Income Sectors Search for Their Couples through Facebook<br/>

'Dating' or 'Escaping'? Cuban Profiles in Dating Websites<br/>

Self-presentation in the Portuguese Online Dating Scene: Does Gender Matter?<br/>

Liberalism Conquering Love: Reports and Reflections on Mass Romantic and Sexual Consumption in the Internet Age<br/>

The Advertising and Profit Model of Leading Dating Sites in China: A Comparison of Jianyuan, Baihe and Zhenai's Targeting and Advertising<br/>

Remediating the Matchmaker: Arranging Marriage Online in the South Asian Diasora in America<br/>

From Arranged to Online: A Study of Courtship Culture in India<br/>

The Role of Places and Symbols: A Cultural Interpretation of the On-line Dating Experience in Israel<br/>

Stranger Stranger or Lonley Lonely? Young Chinese and Dating Apps Between the Locational, the Mobile and the Social<br/>

What are the *Shengv* Looking for in Online Heterosexual Dating and Courtship? A Content Analysis of Shanghainese Women's Personal Profiles on Jiayuan.com<br/>

Keeping it Unreal - Online Dating with Chinese Characteristics<br/>

Talking to Strangers: Temporality, Identity and Politics in Live Webcam Sex Channels<br/>

Performative Acts of Gender in Online Dating: An Auto-ethnography Comparing Sites<br/>

Media's Effect on Online Dating Practices: Turkish TV Marriage Programs and Online Dating as a Medium<br/>
<br/>
