---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

# Introduction

### I. Alev Degim and James Johnson


>*“Matchmaking and introductory intermediaries, particularly for the
purpose of facilitating marriage, have been a component of the
marriage-courtship market long before the emergence of online dating. In
addition, computers have been used for romantic matching, both
commercially and in university settings, for over 60 years.”*[^1]

This book aims to bring together articles across the world on online
dating exercises as a social, economical and political phenomenon and
define online dating as an important experience that should be
considered as a ground for research. As the Internet’s influence on
social life and behaviors increase [^2],[^3]. The virtual realm is
becoming our daily reality [^4],[^5]. So much so that dating digitally
has permeated social networking territories from the very beginning
stages. Looking at the changes and similarities between old and new
behaviors adopted online and offline, this book aims to find
commonalities and discrepancies between cultures and nations on online
dating preferences, shedding light on the influences of new media on
personal and interpersonal levels. This book aims to highlight the
importance of online dating as a site for analysis, as well as
establishing the boundaries for such research. The articles show that
online dating can be studied both qualitatively and quantitatively,
using existing methodologies as venues to understand and adopt this new
way of social engagement.

Online dating and online courtship have been prominent parts of the
daily experience of most users over the years that followed the
proliferation of Internet and Web 2.0.[^6]. Courtship is not a new
phenomenon, dating is a part of the social structure of many cultural
systems. The introduction of new technologies has changed the way we
interact with others, despite early negative stigmatization; forms of
online dating have been integrated into the social structure of various
cultural spheres fairly quickly. The anonymity aspect that had been
prevalent in the early days of blogs and forums slowly lead the way to a
shift from this dualistic representation model of a fake online self to
an overlapping of the online and real identities. This shift can visibly
be seen in the examples of online dating and courtship websites as in
the recent years companies specifically created for this purpose
required real information from their users. The way media in general
represented online dating, especially TV shows, labeled it as “unsafe”
and “sketchy”: an article on Huffington Post sheds light on the dangers
of online dating especially for women[^7], this stigma for online dating
has slowly declined in media. This portrayal of online dating produced a
stigma for the users over the years, the TV shows and other media often
labeled users as “anti-social”: according to a 2013 report from the Pew
Research Center, 21 percent of polled Internet users agree that “People
who use online dating sites are desperate.”[^8]. This type of atmosphere
however, is changing rapidly as the Social Networking Sites (that are
defined as “... web-based services that allow individuals to (1)
construct a public or semi-public profile within a bounded system, (2)
articulate a list of other users with whom they share a connection, and
(3) view and traverse their list of connections and those made by others
within the system.“) [^9] are becoming an eminent part of our daily
lives, since they provide an online social experience that is not
“dangerous”. The increase in these and other online social
experiences[^10] began to change the nature of daily interpersonal
interactions. This change has allowed the users to seek intimate
relationships online more often. “According to a recent estimate based
on ComScore Networks’ analysis of Internet users’ browsing behavior, 40
million Americans visited online dating sites in 2003, generating \$214
million in revenues, making online dating the most important
subscription-based business on the Internet.”[^11].

## Defining Online Courtship/Dating:

*Courtship* typically refers to the stage where two people interact with
one another in an effort to get to know each other romantically; this
stage typically precedes the traditional engagement and marriage stages.
Digital courtship refers to the mixed-mode relationships that begin with
online communication with the expectation of an offline romantic
encounter. We define Online Courtship, as the romantic relationships
founded on online environments - be it on Social Networking Sites (SNS)
or forums or on online dating websites, blogs, mobile apps or even the
comment section of a post on a Youtube video- that leads to an
experience of sharing intimate or romantic thoughts, ideas and emotions
via the offered features of the medium that has the potential to lead to
an offline interaction.

A typical definition for online dating would only encompass the online
dating sites and exclude all other online platforms[^12]. This type of
definition leads to a problem as it is only focusing on the websites
tailored for the purpose of online dating and excluding a vast majority
of online courtship. The previous definitions fail to acknowledge other online venues and limit the boundaries of the field for research.
Hence a broader definition is needed along with identifying the
boundaries of the specific study to insure a better perspective on
online courtship.

As we are becoming increasingly connected to the online world, social
interactions of any kind also comes into the realm with us. Online
studies in general have focused thus far on a variety of different
issues and subjects such as online bullying[^13], self-efficacy and
motivation effects in online environments[^14], YouTube studies[^15],
video spheres[^16] and alternative social media institutions[^17]. The
venue for studying online dating is fairly new to the field and previous
studies on online dating focus on topics such as self-presentation and
deception of online profiles[^18],[^19],[^20], the match-making
algorithm and process[^21], homophily on online dating sites[^22] and
profile creation[^23]. These various studies help define online
courtship as a field of research and acknowledge online courtship as an
important part of online studies.

The site of study then becomes the defining feature of the specific
research. A good and functional definition of online dating sites is
provided by Rosen et. al. as follows: “Online dating sites are all
similarly structured. Participants provide a photograph and answer an
array of questions including geographic location, age, weight or body
type, education level, income, and other relevant demographics...”[^24].
The system is dependent on statistical codes running in the background
that provide the “perfect match” for the user by looking at the
variables. As the sites rely on technology and the social context, the
experience of one user will be rather different than the other (in a
scenario where the person who uses these websites is located in a remote
place that has few participants, the odds are not in their favor and
hence the whole experience would be different from another user); as in
the examples in this volume (see Aras, Levin, Wen, DeSeta), it can have
different connotations for different cultures and contexts and hence a
fixed experience is almost impossible to achieve. In more traditional
societies, online courtship can take on the meaning of finding a partner
in marriage (China, Turkey and India are good examples of this, see
Vikram, Ozgun and Fu) whereas in other cultures it can become a place to
seek one-night stands or webcam sex or to seek company to pass time.
These different examples show the fluid nature of the experience of
online “courtship” or “dating” within the globalizing world, as the
local and global definitions amalgamate in virtual environments.

Digital intimacy has become a normative mode of social interaction
within other mediums online, such as SNS and mobile applications. Rosen
et al. gives examples of studies that have found the increase in such
online environments: an early study shows that 75% of online-formed
relationships became “proper relationships” [^25]. As online dating
becomes a prominent part of social life, it is even more crucial for
social studies to research and analyze this phenomenon.

The way we define Online Courtship helps link different parts of the
phenomenon and give a clear picture of a new approach. We establish
through the articles in this volume that the multifaceted structure of
the online dating environment enables its study with different
methodologies. However it is important to define boundaries for
research; ethical concerns should be addressed before the study is
conducted (which was done in all studies in this volume) and draw the
limits for the specific study as the lines between websites and SNS or
apps can be blurred at times.

Online dating sites may alleviate some of the spatial constraints
experienced when participating in traditional face-to-face courtship,
but contemporary scholarship interrogates the constraints of this
socio-technological space as an environment of existing beliefs and
behaviors that, at times, maintain a hetero-normative hierarchy.
Identity construction in online dating environments is impacted by
social norms offline. Within the digital dating realm self-presentation
and self-disclosure strategies are adapted to gain the attention of
potential online daters[^26]. Singles utilize online dating interfaces
with preset attributes, creating their online identity with identity
markers provided by the site. Online personal ads are user-generated
dossiers aimed to construct online daters’ identity. This scholarship
examines online dating sites as social sites where technology sustains
and reproduces existing gender roles. Recent online dating research also
highlights the limitations of gender construction and the
marginalization that occurs within hetero-normative dating spaces[^27].

Early Internet and gender identity research analyzed men and women
experimenting with the gender roles of gaming avatars[^28]. Online
daters have substituted avatars with profile pictures and personal
summaries. Internet scholars are examining gender constructions in
online spaces, more specifically within online dating environments.
Explorative research analyzes self-presentation and self-disclosure
strategies that reproduce hetero-normative hierarchies in online spaces.
Gender equality continues to be a topic of interests in many spaces
across the world. Computer-mediated-communication within the Online
dating context is another environment investigated to determine whether
or not these are safe spaces for LGBTQ online identities. Literature on
online dating has not focused on different parts of the world. Dating
practices vary from one cultural context to the next, different cultures
view romance through different religious, political, and gendered
lenses. This volume contributes to the existing body of study that
exists on online dating and expands upon the different dynamics within
the World Wide Web by asking questions of different identities and
nationalities. Previous research has not answered the following question
adequately as of yet: If online dating sites are socio-technological
spaces, what happens when the space is geared towards a particular
demographic? Who is left out? What are the social implications of these
online spaces of desire?

This volume includes different methodologies and approaches to examine
online courtship. Murat Akser looks at the history of online dating and
identifies how the research field has dealt with this phenomenon. It is
through his analysis that we see the various fields of research and the
ways they dealt with specific cases. He predicts the future of the
research field to move forward with the introduction of social
networking sites and other technology.

Gabriele de Seta and Ge Zhang’s *Stranger Stranger or Lonely Lonely?
Young Chinese and Dating Apps between the Locational, the Mobile and the
Social* is an ethnographic study about a location-based social app –
Momo, and the floating population who use it. Rather than ‘a one-night
stand mythical device’ as portrayed in media narratives, Momo users’ use
of the mobile app emanates the immobility of “strangers” in populated
metropolises. Studying apps specifically on online dating is a new
approach and is a crucial part of the discussion of the contemporary
social context of online dating.

Unlike in the West, courtship and marriage convey more social pressures
to Chinese in the dating age. Dating websites and broadcasting media
reap millions in this gold mine. Caiyun Wen’s case study of three
leading Chinese dating websites – Baihe, Jiayuan and Zhenai – brought us
to see their “secrets” of profit making with a Chinese touch. Yann L.
Chin examined how *wanglian*, or online romance, is conceptualized by
Chinese Internet users based on two key constructs: ‘Platonic emotional
love’ and ‘play’. Her categorization of online daters as pragmatist
fantasists, skeptics and romantic realists is more than a fun of
oxymoron’s but an in-depth analysis of the dichotomous and
interconnected reality and virtuality and a modern Chinese society where
materialistic prosperity and spiritual emptiness co-exist. Sheena Raja
and Bryce J. Renninger’s in-depth interviews scrutinized the interplay
of people, technology and media brought by globalization and its
influence to South Asian diasporas in the New York City metro area in
their pursuit of courtship. Computer-mediated communication remediates
matchmaking, biodata of online daters and the subjectivity of diasporas.
Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi delineated how married, divorced, unmarried,
widowed, awaiting divorce, and annulled Indians seek partners at three
online matrimonial sites – Shaadi, BharatMatrimony and Jeevansathi.
Through this lens, the dynamics between online and offline dating
activities, technology and individuals, and tradition and modernity in
Indian society is presented to us.

The ubiquitous nature of technology often blurs the lines, in some cases
completely rewrite, society’s popular social norms. This holds true in
online courtship. The emergence of online courtship has gained attention
from media as well as new sociological and behavioral studies examining
humans’ participation and practices in mixed mode relationships
(relationships that begin online with the expectation of an intimate
offline encounter). This section consists of case studies examining the
social and legal boundaries that helped shape the business of personal
ads, dating sites as doorways, Facebook as an adolescent dating scene,
and mapping dating culture within digital communities.

This volume explores digital courtship across mediums. Harry Cocks
provides a historical trajectory of mediated courtship in Western
Europe, exploring third party involvement in courtship, which is not a
modern phenomenon. Western Europe has a history of third party
involvement with courtship ranging from arranged marriages, via parents
and kin, and through professional matchmakers. Web 2.0 has turned
Internet consumers into producers by allowing users to generate content.
The Internet has created a communication culture of mutual and permanent
evaluation. Ramón Reichert discusses dating maps as a way to analyze
dating cultures as digital communities consisting of user-generated
content creating a feedback loop that results in media-specific forms of
subjectification. Looking at virtual realms as venues, Facebook is
analyzed as an Argentinian nightclub for adolescence, as Basil and Linne
examine adolescent impression management strategies when romantically
pursuing relationships via Facebook. The Internet has become a social
tool for many Internet users. Casmiro examines the influence that gender
has on self-presentation practices in Portuguese online dating profiles.
This research highlights how gender roles influence self-presentation
constructions within the Portuguese dating context. Dating practices
reveal that dating sites serve as a door to other regions. Cuba’s
Internet access is one of the lowest in Latin America, inhibiting
private use of the World Wide Web. Pino uses online dating profiles in
conjunction with interviews, analyzing the dating practices of singles
seeking singles in Cuba and Cuban singles seeking intimacy outside of
Cuba. These researchers open up and extend insight on how digital dating
practices utilize different mediums to alleviate spatial boundaries and
cultural constraints.

This section explores courtship across mediums. Harry Cocks provides a
historical trajectory of mediated courtship in Western Europe, exploring
third party involvement in courtship, which is not a modern phenomenon.
Western Europe has a history of third party involvement with courtship
ranging from arranged marriages, via parents and kin, and through
professional matchmakers. Basil and Linne examine adolescents in Buenos
Aires, Argentina use of Facebook as a venue for Internet dating.
Researchers examine adolescent impression management strategies when
romantically pursuing relationships via Facebook. Virtual Nightclub
references this social network as a venue for adolescent matchmaking.
Pino’s study explores the social implications of poor Internet access
and online dating in Cuba.
Discourse analysis is conducted on online dating profiles, in
conjunction with interviews, analyzing the dating practices of singles
seeking singles in Cuba and Cuban singles seeking intimacy outside of
Cuba. Dating practices reveal that dating sites serve as a door spaces
outside of Cuba. The corollary of this study correlates politics,
technological and financial reasons to the current formation of Cuban
online dating practices.

The Internet has become a social tool for many online users. This
chapter examines the influence that gender has on self-presentation
practices in Portuguese online dating profiles. Data is analyzed via
content analysis and grounded theory. This research highlights how modern
gender roles influence self-presentation constructions within the
Portuguese dating context.

Web 2.0 has turned Internet consumers into producers by allowing users
to generate content. The Internet has created a communication culture of
mutual and permanent evaluation. This study discusses dating maps as a
way to analyze dating cultures of digital communities. User generated
content creates a feedback loop that results in media-specific forms of
subjectification.

The tension between the global experience that the Internet provides and
the physical restrictions of one's geographical location is an
interesting asymmetry when forming online intimate relationships. David
Levin invokes the speech theory to examine the Israeli online dating
experience that he characterizes as a cultural construct that follows
the traditional paths for marriage. The local-global tension becomes
apparent with the analysis, as the particular vocabulary and language
the users adopt on these sites reveal a diasporic mode of identity
construction. Being closely tied with social norms and traditions,
societies face a shift in the experiences of identities and national,
ethnic selfhood descriptions. Aras Ozgun identifies an interesting
example of Webcam channels, where the participants can perform
erotic/sexual performances for strangers and how this relates to
national identity politics. By introducing the identity formation angle,
Ozgun draws unique features of the semi-secular culture of Turkish
identity and the male-female gender constructs that play into these
relationships. Enver Ozustun identifies a case study of the Turkish
marriage programs that became a benchmark for the online dating
experience. It is through these channels that the vocabulary of the
online dating sites are built upon in Turkey and these programs
determined what the individuals are to expect from a relationship.

Defining the self in an online environment is a crucial point in finding
a potential romantic partner on the web. Analyzing the relations of
users from an inside perspective (with ethical considerations) Megan
Lindsay explores the online dating sites by participant observation and
auto-ethnography methods. Her experiences reflect the socio-cultural
environment of OkCupid and Match.com websites. Attracting an audience,
building an image for a specific target audience and expectations from
other parties compose the major framework of her analysis.

The industry behind the online dating phenomenon is a large one. The online
dating market has become a \$2 billion industry [^29]. Pascal Lardellier
explores the political economy of dating sites in France and analyzes
the underlying structures that are at play. The commodification of love
now assisted by the computerized technology also takes away from the
intimate experience, monetizing the relationship. Also Reichert’s
analysis examines the cartographic visualizations and the underlying
structures within this system. The changing role of digital intimacy
within the market is affecting the way we perceive relationships,
especially considering that Google, Facebook and Twitter form the
largest shares in the market.

This book attempts to shed light on the online dating phenomenon through
various methodologies with an eclectic approach. If we think about the
data and analysis of the use of these websites and other platforms
employed for online dating purposes, it is easy to see that online
courtship will become an increasingly embedded social norm for
communities around the world. The philosophical, socio-political and
social network analysis (SNA) approaches to the discussion of online
courtship will enhance existing knowledge and broaden our understanding
of the subject in further studies.

## References:

Barraket, Jo, and Millsom S. Henry-Waring. ‘Getting it on (line)
Sociological perspectives on e-dating.’ *Journal of Sociology* 44.2
(2008): 149-165.

J. A. Bargh and K. Y. McKenna, ‘The Internet and social life.’ *Annu.
Rev. Psychol.*, 55, (2004): 573-590.

Bauman, Z. 'Liquid Modernity, Cambridge (Reino Unido), Polity Press,
2000; Liquid Love: On the Frailty of Human Bonds, Cambridge (Reino
Unido), Polity Press, 2003, por Jesus M. de Miguel y Jara D. Sanchez.'
*Revista Espanola De Investiagiones Sociologicas – Spanish Edition*.
(110), (2005): 239-256.

A. Beaulieu, ‘Mediating ethnography: objectivity and the making of
ethnographies of the internet.’ *Social Epistemology*, 18(2-3), (2004):
139-163.

Ellison, Nicole B. ‘Social network sites: Definition, history, and
scholarship.’ *Journal of Computer‐Mediated Communication* 13.1 (2007):
210-230.

Ellison, Nicole, Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. ‘Managing
impressions online: Self‐presentation processes in the online dating
environment.’ *Journal of Computer‐Mediated Communication* 11.2 (2006):
415-441.

E. J. Finkel, P. W. Eastwick, B. R. Karney, H. T. Reis and S. Sprecher,
‘Online Dating A Critical Analysis From the Perspective of Psychological
Science.’ *Psychological Science in the Public Interest*, 13(1), (2012):
3-66.

Fiore, Andrew T., and Judith S. Donath. ‘Homophily in online dating:
when do you like someone like yourself?.’ *CHI'05 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems*. ACM, 2005.

Lovink, Geert, and Sabine Niederer. *Video vortex reader: Responses to
YouTube*. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.

Lovink, Geert, and Miriam Rasch. Unlike us reader: social media
monopolies and their alternatives. No. 8. *Institute of Network Cultures*,
2013.

J. A. Hall, N. Park, H. Song and M. J. Cody, ‘Strategic
misrepresentation in online dating: The effects of gender,
self-monitoring, and personality traits.’ Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 27(1), (2010): 117-135.J. T. Hancock and C. L. Toma,
‘Putting your best face forward: The accuracy of online dating
photographs.’ *Journal of Communication*, 59(2), (2009): 367-386.

Hancock, Jeffrey T., Catalina Toma, and Nicole Ellison. ‘The truth about
lying in online dating profiles.’ *Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems*. ACM, 2007.

G. J. Hitsch, A. Hortaçsu and D. Ariely, ‘What makes you click: An
empirical analysis of online dating.’ 2005 Meeting Papers (Vol. 207).
*Society for Economic Dynamics*. (2005).

Hitsch, Günter J., Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely. ‘Matching and sorting
in online dating.’ *The American Economic Review* (2010): 130-163.

C. L. Hsu, and J. C. C. Lin, ‘Acceptance of blog usage: The roles of
technology acceptance, social influence and knowledge sharing
motivation.’ *Information & Management*, 45(1), (2008): 65-74.

Irizarry, Robert. ‘Self-efficacy and motivation effects on online
psychology student retention.’ *Usdla Journal* 16.12 (2002): 55-64.

Juvonen, Jaana, and Elisheva F. Gross. ‘Extending the school
grounds?—Bullying experiences in cyberspace.’ *Journal of School health*
78.9 (2008): 496-505.

L. D. Rosen, N. A. Cheever, C. Cummings and J. Felt, ‘The impact of
emotionality and self-disclosure on online dating versus traditional
dating.’ *Computers in Human Behavior*, 24(5), (2008): 2124-2157.

Jessica M. Sautter, Rebecca M. Tippett and S. Philip Morgan. ‘The Social
Demography of Internet Dating in the United States.’ *Social Science
Quarterly* 91.2 (2010): 554-575.

A. Vasalou and A. N. Joinson, ‘Me, myself and I: The role of
interactional context on self-presentation through avatars.’ *Computers
in Human Behavior*, 25(2), (2009): 510-520.

Treske, Andreas. *The inner life of video sphere*. Amsterdam: Institute of Network
Cultures. 2013.

Toma, Catalina L., Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Nicole B. Ellison.
‘Separating fact from fiction: An examination of deceptive
self-presentation in online dating profiles.’ *Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin* 34.8 (2008): 1023-1036.

S. Woolgar, (Ed.). *Virtual Society?: Technology, Cyberhole, Reality*.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2002.

Huffington Post. <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/damona-hoffman/mary-kay-beckman-online-dating_b_2561380.html>.

The Independent. <http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/daily-internet-use-has-more-than-doubled-in-past-seven-years-8752987.html>.

The Fiscal Times. <http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/Articles/2014/02/14/Valentines-Day-2014-How-Online-Dating-Became-2-Billion-Industry>.

The Gazette. <http://thegazette.com/2014/03/16/online-dating-still-stigmatized-despite-popularity-sucess/>.

[^1]: E. J. Finkel, P. W. Eastwick, B. R. Karney, H. T. Reis and S.
    Sprecher, ‘Online Dating A Critical Analysis From the Perspective of
    Psychological Science.’ *Psychological Science in the Public
    Interest*, 13(1), (2012): 3-66.

[^2]: J. A. Bargh and K. Y. McKenna, ‘The Internet and social life.’
    *Annu. Rev. Psychol.*, 55, (2004): 573-590.

[^3]: C. L. Hsu, and J. C. C. Lin, ‘Acceptance of blog usage: The roles
    of technology acceptance, social influence and knowledge sharing
    motivation.’ *Information & Management*, 45(1), (2008): 65-74.

[^4]: S. Woolgar, (Ed.). Virtual Society?: Technology, Cyberhole,
    Reality. *Oxford University Press*. 2002.

[^5]: A. Beaulieu, ‘Mediating ethnography: objectivity and the making of
    ethnographies of the internet.’ *Social Epistemology*, 18(2-3),
    (2004): 139-163.

[^6]: Jessica M. Sautter, Rebecca M. Tippett and S. Philip Morgan. ‘The
    Social Demography of Internet Dating in the United States.’ *Social
    Science Quarterly* 91.2 (2010): 554-575.

[^7]: Huffington Post. [http://www.huffingtonpost.com/damona-hoffman/mary-kay-beckman-online-dating\\\_b\\\_2561380.html](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/damona-hoffman/mary-kay-beckman-online-dating\_b\_2561380.html).

[^8]: The Gazette. <http://thegazette.com/2014/03/16/online-dating-still-stigmatized-despite-popularity-sucess/>

[^9]: N. B. Ellison, ‘Social network sites: Definition, history, and
    scholarship.’ *Journal of Computer Mediated Communication*, 13(1),
    (2007): 210-230.

[^10]: The Independent. <http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/daily-internet-use-has-more-than-doubled-in-past-seven-years-8752987.html>.

[^11]: G. J. Hitsch, A. Hortaçsu and D. Ariely, ‘What makes you click:
    An empirical analysis of online dating.’ 2005 Meeting Papers (Vol.
    207). *Society for Economic Dynamics*. (2005).

[^12]: It is defined functionally as “a purposeful form of meeting new
    people through specifically designed Internet sites,” Barraket, Jo,
    and Millsom S. Henry-Waring. ‘Getting it on (line) Sociological
    perspectives on e-dating.’ *Journal of Sociology* 44.2 (2008):
    149-165.

[^13]: Juvonen, Jaana, and Elisheva F. Gross. ‘Extending the school
    grounds?—Bullying experiences in cyberspace.’ *Journal of School
    Health* 78.9 (2008): 496-505.

[^14]: Irizarry, Robert. ‘Self-efficacy and motivation effects on online
    psychology student retention.’ *Usdla Journal* 16.12 (2002): 55-64.

[^15]: Lovink, Geert, and Sabine Niederer. *Video vortex reader:
    Responses to YouTube*. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures,
    2008.

[^16]: Treske, Andreas. The inner life of video sphere. *Institute of
    Network Cultures*. 2013.

[^17]: Lovink, Geert, and Miriam Rasch. Unlike us reader: social media
    monopolies and their alternatives. No. 8. *Institute of Network
    Cultures*, 2013.

[^18]: Ellison, Nicole, Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. ‘Managing
    impressions online: Self‐presentation processes in the online dating
    environment.’ *Journal of Computer‐Mediated Communication* 11.2
    (2006): 415-441.

[^19]: Toma, Catalina L., Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Nicole B. Ellison.
    ‘Separating fact from fiction: An examination of deceptive
    self-presentation in online dating profiles.’ *Personality and
    Social Psychology Bulletin* 34.8 (2008): 1023-1036.

[^20]: Hancock, Jeffrey T., Catalina Toma, and Nicole Ellison. ‘The
    truth about lying in online dating profiles.’ *Proceedings of the
    SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems*. ACM, 2007.

[^21]: Hitsch, Günter J., Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely. ‘Matching and
    sorting in online dating.’ *The American Economic Review* (2010):
    130-163.

[^22]: Fiore, Andrew T., and Judith S. Donath. ‘Homophily in online
    dating: when do you like someone like yourself?.’ *CHI'05 Extended
    Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems*. ACM, 2005.

[^23]: Fiore, Andrew T., and Judith S. Donath. ‘Homophily in online
    dating: when do you like someone like yourself?.’ *CHI'05 Extended
    Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems*. ACM, 2005.

[^24]: L. D. Rosen, N. A. Cheever, C. Cummings and J. Felt, ‘The impact
    of emotionality and self-disclosure on online dating versus
    traditional dating.’ *Computers in Human Behavior*, 24(5), (2008):
    2124-2157.

[^25]: Ibid. p. 2124-2157.

[^26]: J. T. Hancock and C. L. Toma, ‘Putting your best face forward:
    The accuracy of online dating photographs.’ *Journal of
    Communication*, 59(2), (2009): 367-386.

[^27]: J. A. Hall, N. Park, H. Song and M. J. Cody, ‘Strategic
    misrepresentation in online dating: The effects of gender,
    self-monitoring, and personality traits.’ *Journal of Social and
    Personal Relationships*, 27(1), (2010): 117-135.

[^28]: A. Vasalou and A. N. Joinson, ‘Me, myself and I: The role of
    interactional context on self-presentation through avatars.’
    *Computers in Human Behavior*, 25(2), (2009): 510-520.

[^29]: S. Yoder, How Online Dating Became a $2 Billion Industry, Fiscal Times, 2014. <http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/Articles/2014/02/14/Valentines-Day-2014-How-Online-Dating-Became-2-Billion-Industry>.
