---
Pr-id: Publications  
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 16  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: Online Courship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, H. G Cocks, Murat Akser, Ramón Reichert, Diego Basile, Joaquín Linne, Lázaro M. Bacallao Pino, Cláudia Casimiro, Pascal Lardellier, Caiyun Wen, Sheena Raja and Bryce J. Renninger, Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi, David Levin, Gabriele de Seta, Ge Zhang, Tao Fu, Aras Ozgun, Megan Lindsay, Enver Ozustun. 
Author-email: alevdegim@siu.edu
Author-bio: about the author  
Editor: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu
Abstract: Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives. 
The research decodes the approach to online dating in various countries like France, India, China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.   
Keywords: online dating, social media, Institute of Network Cultures, print on demand, digital media, media theory, sociology, humanities, new media, France, India, China, Portugal, USA, methodologies, match.com, courtship, traditional, differences, Turkey, interactions, romantic, partners, search, love, facebook. 
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...

# Dating Maps: Mapping Love in Online Dating Communities

###  RAMÓN REICHERT

## Introduction

The development of the web into a living web, where a multitude of users
create their own content, led to consumers becoming the producers. With
this role reversal, the perception of network processes changed,
creating an altered need to view and systematically research one's own
network environment and certain areas from an overview perspective.
Before this background, visualization and mapping rose to become key
technologies of Web 2.0. This stands for the spatial data collection for
the creation of maps with computer-aided surveillance systems. One kind
of the quickest growing online communities in Web 2.0 is dating
communities. They not only considerably advanced the research and the
development, but also the possibilities and the empowerment of the
individual with their cognitive and visual remixes. Therefore, location
determination with satellite-aided orientation technologies is no longer
the monopoly of the most technologically advanced military equipment.
Interactive mapping technologies of social relationships in
computer-aided data banks can be placed at the interface between the
*individual mapping and the collaborative mapping*. From there, new
dimensions of a technology-aided orientation of social visibility can be
created.

The spatial mapping technologies for data recording of network workers
operate less as the access to uninteresting knowledge, but primarily as
device in the competition for economic advantages and power as part of
effective dating management. From a historical standpoint, the dating
maps of the social media in Web 2.0 also actively influenced the manner
in which cartography of the digital knowledge spaces of the Internet
generates the collective memory of date cultures and love organizations.
In that respect, they visually organize space pursuant to varying
criteria, in which the time and culture association of the perception
are tied to the discussions on: 1. Information (i.e. the availability of
finding, assessing, and managing information), 2. Identity (i.e. the
availability of presenting aspects of oneself on the Internet), and 3.
Relationships (i.e. the availability of establishing contact, nurture
contact, and form new combinations). Thus, dating maps can be understood
as Internet-based applications, supporting the management of
information, identity, and relations in specific public domains of
hyper- textual and social networks. When comprehended as historicizable
cultural techniques, the technologies, discussions, and practices of
dating maps also communicate certain spatial concepts, realization and
media cultures, iconic qualities, and political theories of the
representation. On one hand, cartographic visualizations by the dating
communities attempts to meet the growing needs of the computer-aided
representation of social networks on the Internet. On the other hand,
their navigation tools are advancing to a decisive tool in the medial
formatting of the dating cultures of digital communities.

## Love Organizations on Web 2.0

The new digital dating cultures are part of the E-commerce business.
Flirting and dating exchanges on Web 2.0 are popular entertainment,
connected to the commercial use of the net. This commercial framework
can be found in all areas of the love organization on the net.
Initially, mapping of the dating culture takes place in the bit-mapping
sector, at a level constitutively inaccessible to the female and male
users. Bit mapping principally differs from the cartographic mapping of
the interface architecture, and, according to Wolfgang Ernst, can be
understood as a technological and mathematical process, "topological
instead of geographical, non-narrative (data-based) instead of
narrative, connective instead of spatial in nature (...and) deals with
the code (software) instead of images, numbers instead of sensual
realization."[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_1] The spy technologies used in online dating exchanges
are learning programs, which study the habits of the users, create user
profiles, and offers by suitable partners. With the help of the cookies
on the user’s hard drive, the spy programs of commercial dating services
providers own an archive of the love customs of their users. They store
the preferences and options of its users, constantly learn their habits,
and attempt to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the search
for partners. In that sense, the spy technologies and their cookies
superpose the dating and consumer culture.

The distinct difference between the "free" contact ads portals and the
Internet partner agencies “for a fee” is that singles of the
"fee-charging" dating agencies do not need to go search themselves. The
singles of the largest provider of online dating services, that is the
US competitor match.com, receive suggestions for possible partners with
the help of evaluations, expert assessments, and matching processes.
"Matching" is the English and new German term for the finding of partner
suggestions, based on search algorithms, comparing the profiles of
singles of an online dating site, releasing the hits with the mutual
largest concordance (match point score).

In 1987, the first-ever a computer-based dating agency offered its
services in Austin (Texas). The company operated under the name
Matchmaker, and developed a personality questionnaire with 50 questions,
including questions concerning one's own person and the desired partner,
aside from the usual social-statistical data such as sex, age, height,
and weight. The order "Make me a match" had to conclude the data
inquiry. Through changing the desired characteristics based on the
respective supply situation on the relationship market, the number of
suggestions could either be increased or reduced. This basic structure
of the search still is used today in data banks as a selection
criterion. As a whole, the matching procedures suggest codifiable and
self-programming social relationships.

Differing from contact exchanges, the so-called "serious" platforms like
*match.com, eharmony.com, or parship.com*, operate with a software
program based on the mathematical search algorithms of key matching.
This procedure determines within limited time, whether a respective
search value is in concordance with a key value within a limited search
area. Contrary to pattern recognition (the finding of patterns in
signals), the search procedure for the best matching units depends on
words entered.

Like the Assessment Center, the online dating agencies use psychological
tests, in particular personality tests, for documenting the self-image
of the candidates in search and evaluation procedures.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_2] Like the
Assessment Center, partner agencies consist of complex processes of self
and second-party evaluation, combining self-techniques in the form of
self-evaluation and feedback with disciplinary techniques.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_3] Diverse
versions of the feedback software offer all members on the community
sites the opportunity of mutual evaluation and assessment. Feedback
records provide extensive and flexible information on the persons, and
create comparisons between supply and demand by statistical evaluation
of the respective preferences and capabilities, and offering couples'
psychological coaching on that basis.

The monitoring and control knowledge collected then is listed in various
manners in graphic overview maps, lists, or quantitatively assessed
diagrams. In order of successfully placing in dating communities, the
users must develop certain *mapping and monitoring* capacities in the
area of everyday and relationship management. The mapping technologies
of most dating forums promise to render social relationships and social
behavior storable in spatial orders and knowledge recording
technologies, manageable, and assessable, that is basically controllable
and directable.

The software architecture and the screen design of the flirt and love
culture on Web 2.0 not only represents the technological processes for
the mapping of social networks, but can also be placed generally with
*social monitoring*, based on its discourses. Monitoring is a collective
term for all types of systematic recording, observing and monitoring of
a process with the aid of technical devices or other monitoring systems.
Social control, understood as monitoring, comprises a multitude of
knowledge technologies, which combine the safety, risk, care, and
monitoring discourses to the mapping of life conduct discourses.

## Geomapping I: Street Maps and Satellite Images

Social software-based networks like contact exchanges, dating agencies,
real-time chat services utilize geographical information services (GIS),
and the distance research by satellite photography, in order to
visualize their online databanks on clearly arranged world maps.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_4] One
differentiating field of digital technologies among the field of web
mapping and web GIS comprises far spread offers of zoomable street,
land, and satellite maps with hyperlinks, plug-ins, viewers, micro maps,
cartographic animation technologies, and visually responsive terrain
overflights.

The cartographies of the online dating communities transform flirting
and dating into spatial information. Their visualization processes are
superposed with knowledge technologies, concerned with aspects of
topography, infrastructure, settlement geography, economic geography,
territory, social geography, politics, history, biology, geology,
tectonics, and others.

For visualizing the *exploration* of the digital space, the community
sites have used *street maps* and *satellite image* for some time. With
the adaptation of these two image traditions, they attempted to transfer
cartographic characteristics of the *oriented* space to the knowledge
representation of the love organization. In a further step, the dating
sites localize their players on the selected cartographic blueprint.
With the respective geographical coordinates determinable for certain,
the individuals can be entered as dots, nicknames, or profile photos
into a landscape, city, or building. Thus, geomapping concerns
translating the online dates into the physical action and living space
to enable a spatial orientation. The proximity to neighborhoods here is
determined by *proximity,* and participates in the logic of strong ties.
This suggests intensive relationships in the social space in particular
through *geographical proximity* or *neighboring* of players in the
physical space. This presentation superposes social and spatial
proximity without rendering them significant. Thus, the interpretation
of this spatial arrangement remains with the female and male users.

As a rule, at the map design level a selection can be made between
various map models and visualization processes - frequently, a choice
between schematic street map and photographic satellite image is given.
With the adaptation of the *street map*, attempts are made to display
social networks, contacts, and relationships as route planning and
geographical route-target orientation. Based on the model of
geographical maps, borders, traffic routes, main roads, centers, and
outlying zones simulate the dating topographies of potential partners.
Flirting and dating maps provide a visual abstraction, and record
distances and the relative position of the members to each other on
two-dimensional maps.

The street and city maps used in dating processes represent a
spatialized level of classificatory knowledge, and address the observer
as a subject, with an overview of all potential partners, adopting the
respective profiles as spatial-navigating. With simple geometrical
figures, decisive connotations are marked, presenting a clear,
uncomplicated world of order, targeting primarily quick understanding.
Dating maps synthesize from the original material (email addresses,
online status etc.) the respective actors and transform them into items
that can be clicked on, or clicked away. Interactive media technologies
are connected with aspects of older media types, but form tools for
structural, constructed identities. The possible interactions between
the members take place in a determined action space, provided by the
mapping software as so-called tech-tree.

In the era of Google Maps, *satellite images* represent a dominant
topographical model of knowledge. Satellite photography not only offers
realistic visual graphic quality, but also a kinesthetic sensation of
movement through the shown virtual spaces (zooming). Different from the
graphic schematizing of street maps, satellite images intensify the
impression of reality: on one hand, they give evidence and plausibility
to the social reality; on the other hand, they blur the
social-hegemonial conditions of the knowledge technologies of
visualization in their assumed creation of evidence. The satellite
images of the surface of the earth are medial products of the
military-technological knowledge complex, and always also represent the
demand for visual empowerment and the "complete" discovery of military
relevant knowledge objects.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_5]

Most frequently, the community maps are based on a geographical pattern
of national belonging and identity. Their external appearance frequently
shows common characteristics with the route maps of online route
planners, and city map services. They offer on one hand a *selective
image* of what the respective services would like to emphasize, and, for
example, mark potential flirting partners with signal colors, arrows,
inserts, speech bubbles, or icons. On the other hand, they create
*imaginary pictures* of global availability and omnipresent world
dominance. They simulate a deistic view of the globe. As *image of
power*, maps always had been used for military strategic planning,
social monitoring, economic control, theoretical analysis and
structuring, the conquest of new territories, and the judicial
legalization of property. Therefore, it is not surprising that the
commercial providers on the net present their own community as knowledge
object, capable of testing, recording for planning purposes, and
mutually checking themselves. With the interactive maps, the
relationship networks themselves turn into location questions. Even in
the so-called real life, cities more and more turn into competing
enterprises, rivals for the investments from the high tech sector.
Online mapping passes on this aspect, assembling profiles as "critical
mass" in often-frequented places, thus garnering the respective
attention.

## Geomapping II: World Map and Globe

The knowledge representations of the street map and the satellite images
orients at the cartographic overview presentations, and operates with
the map design of the *world map* or the *globe*. Even though
cartography presents the attempt to reduce the meaning surplus of its
images to the essential as far as possible, it connects to a multitude
of imaginary relations between individual actions, and social meanings.
The *world maps* represent the life of the individual as a tangible and
presentable phenomenon, and provide the individual with the impression
that his own life is of social, political, and "world historic"
significance.

The knowledge representation of the *world atlas* familiar to most
people is easily created with GIS software, and is frequently used for
the mapping of member profiles. There, one-dimensional data are
projected onto nation-state contours before a geographical background.
For example, the sites *flickrvision.com* and *twittermap.com*,
visualize the real-time public chats of their communities onto a
political world map. The maps show at what location in the world an
online blog is being written. With the help of an operating menu, the
users can adapt their personal needs, for example restrict them to a
certain region. With a selection menu, the most varied map layers can be
hidden or shown and personal dot coordinates stored. A RSS feed
subscribing to the entries of a *certain geographical region* can be
created by entering location and radius. Interactive mapping
technologies such as the zoom function and geographical regionalization
via RSS feed serve the above referenced visual needs of complexity
reduction. Unlike the panorama map, they provide less of a comprehensive
overview, but depict limited sections of the social world as *framed
surfaces*. Their fragmentation corresponds to the changed architecture
of the world map as part of globalization: margins move more and more
into the center and the former power center as defining locations lose
more and more significance. However, this assessment may not be
generalized.

Paul Butler, who completed an internship with Facebook, created a
graphic representation of friendship relations on Facebook. He
visualized millions of friendships in relation to the respective city.
He used all the friendship relationships of more than 500 million
Facebook users as the basis. The continents are still well recognizable
on the social maps, sometimes even the political borders. This
statement, however, does not include the entire world. The map is as
dark in Russia as in China. This has different reasons. While Facebook
is blocked in China, Russia has its own social network with VContacts.

With the interactive use of the map, the views disperse, and the static
dots and lines dissolve into heterogenic and discontinued moments. The
numerous options for selection, generalization, and classification of
data, as well as the numerous selection criteria in the usage area of
map design integrate subjective decision processes in the creation of
maps. The multitude of complex interactive maps simulates the divine
ability of navigating on a virtual information globe. However, the
simulation of theological view constellations cannot disguise that the
interface channels the manipulation of the map by the actor, thereby
constitutively hiding the complexity of the sociotechnological order of
protocols, addresses, and hardware components.

Global navigation maps target the increase in physical immersion
experiences, the creation of movement illusion, and the interconnection
of subject and device. On the other hand, they enable an additional
semiotization of other members, who can be consumed as part of a map
storyline running in the background. The comprehensive narrative of the
overview map creates a mega-story of the world, and claims to comprise
the entity of what is happening in the world, and to connect it - from
the macro level to the micro level.

Who just made love around the world? A new website titled "I Just Made
Love!" by 26-year-old programmer Cyprian Ciećkiewicz from Warsaw uses
GPS and Google Map for integrating sexuality into a global tale. Users
around the globe may anonymously mark the locations where they are
sexually active right now. Nearly 80,000 respective experiences already
were listed on that Internet site. The site does not sink to the level
of pornography, but uses humor and playfulness to attract as many users
as possible: little bunnies serve as comic symbols for encoding the
details of sexual activities.

The world map developed by *Twittervision* shows a twofold inscription
of meaning. On one hand, the statement aspect of the world map supports
political-territorial hegemony with straight-line borders. On the other
hand, the map emphasizes a relational orientation through personalizing
inserts depicting the dynamic appropriation raster of the cartographic
space. The linear borderlines stabilize the canon of geopolitical maps
and the power relations. The micro blogs do not question the postulate
of the borderlines, and remain true to the idea of the national state as
associated territory. However, the reproduction of nation-state order
functions of borders and traffic networks discharges the technical
utopia of non-personifed and fleeting discussion groups - an idea once
significantly carrying the hype of the "spirit" of the cyberspace.

In the spatial distance of maps, the hectic world of social relations
appears as a unit withdrawn from temporality: what appears on the level
of the world map happens at the threshold of the visible. Since
distances are difficult to estimate in the depth of maps, distance
transforms into an aerial presentation. The panorama view of the social
always also refers to a panoptical projection attempting to overcome the
contradictions resulting from the confusion of the search questions and
search results. [](http://www.xcult.org/texte/tietjen/#sdfootnote3sym)At
the same time, digital mapping technologies are a panoptical projection
relying on the power of overview, and operating with a fictive overview.

Mapping can be understood as a visualization process, able to summarize
and represent data and information on the operational state of complex
knowledge areas into a single visual image. The community maps drafted
approximately in 2005 reproduce the cartographic standards of
*planimetric map views*. The two-dimensional maps show a direct view,
and utilize a uniform reduction of the scale. The spatialization process
started where a map-like structure is applied to data collections is
intended to visualize extensive databanks of abstract information in
generalized and simplified images that reduce the research time and show
relations otherwise going unnoted. Today, these continuations of the
geographical-empirical space gradually are replaced by the information
visualization of the social network maps marking the recent changes in
the visualization culture of the social.

## Ego Networks

In the area of visualization of social networks, only a few prototypical
developments are still found today, such as the analysis software
Vizster,[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_6] Social Landscape[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_7] or Matrix Explorer.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_8] Here, social
networks are represented in their formal relationship structures between
formal actors in an abstract "social space.” This abstraction allows
disassociation from all other relations and only shows the position of
the actors in a network of social connections and characteristics. The
design study *Vizster* by Danah Boyd and Jeffrey Heer visualizes the
friendship relations of the dating platform "Friendster"
(www.friendster.com) along the following order criteria:

”Friendster was designed to be an online dating site, complete with
profiles, demographic and interest driven search, and a private
messaging system. What made Friendster unique was its articulated social
networking component and testimonial feature. Users were asked to
declare "friends" on the system whose pictures would also appear on the
profile when the friends confirmed the relationship. [...] Yet, when the
early adopters began to use the service, they did not view it as a
dating service, but a site where they could gather and communicate with
their friends, surf for entertaining profiles and explore public
displays of identity and relationships.”[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_9]

With the mapping tool *Vizster*, Friendster users can explore their
social environment. With the mouse pointer, they can activate a focus
that displays profile data such as name, gender, number of friends,
interests, favorite movies, and other. In addition, by selecting certain
characteristics, certain players in the network with these
characteristics can be highlighted. Under that aspect, mutual friends
and communication carriers can be identified relevant for the connection
of specific (sub-) groups. Finally, partial networks can be filtered
which include a higher density of relations between the actors. For
easier recognition, these partial networks can have a colored
background. Vizster is designed as an analysis tool intended to
encourage laypeople to discover friendship relations and similarities
between networks. With its high-grade usability for network analysis,
Vizster provided the development direction for a number of additional
projects. Today, several versions are available for all important social
networking sites like MySpace, Facebook, and its German language clone
StudiVZ.

We want to introduce one of these network visualization tools as an
example, since it demonstrates in detail the interactive-explorative
network analysis. *Touchgraph,* the visualization software of search
hits developed in 2001 for the search engine Google, is among the most
favorite social mapping tools of today. The mapping tool *Touchgraph*
visualizes the following questions: with whom am I in direct contact,
and what is the connection between my contacts? Is there a definite
group formation, and if yes, what is it like? To whom else are the
contacts connected I have among the search results? Touchgraph is an
independent Java application, requiring an installed Java environment
that can be opened in the browser. The operation is interactive and easy
to understand. Individual relations can be hidden or expanded.
Relationship groups can be color-coded, thus rendering them more
distinguishable. The left side also displays a list of the relationships
including ranking. *Touchgraph* organizes the central relationships
pursuant to the model of ego networks. Friends are placed concentrically
around the ego point. The application *Touchgraph* is allowed as plug-in
software without installation on Facebook, and automatically shows all
Facebook contacts as animated cluster. This structure of presentation
helps to view the structures in hundreds of contacts in one image, and
helps to detect who knows whom via which person. Another mode of
presentation of this actor mapping hides the profile photo on Facebook,
and concentrates on the relational relationships. This spatial embedding
of the individual actors, however, exposes the classical information
deficit of social network analysis. As in most social networks, the
actors are shown as uniform dots that do not allow conclusions
concerning individual characteristics, except for the relational
position. This visualization does not communicate any information
relating to demographical or biographical differences, or individual
forms of knowledge, responsibility, or diverse competences.

*Vizster* and the *Touchgraph Facebook browser* are so-called ego
networks. These exclusively show network members directly connected to
the central actor ("ego"), or at least in close relationship. More
distant network members are hidden. However, spatial order in ego
networks must first be interpreted. Other than the presentation form of
the social circle where all actors are placed on a circle, focusing, for
example, on those actors, whose mails receive a particularly large
quantity of responses, Vizster focuses on a certain actor around who
clusters form, where friends show particularly many connections amongst
them. Since the social network is determined based on the ego, the
central focus in such presentations appears over proportionately well
connected - which does not need to correspond to the actual conditions.
In order to remove this distortion, the *Touchgraph Facebook browser*
offers the opportunity to hide the ego function, with a new order of the
graph ensuing, forming a socio-centered network.

This free-floating item of the relationship cloud shows that the ego
floats in the center of connections, but no longer is able to stabilize
the social order. Thus, the ego primarily appears as secondary observer
of social networks letting the structural position of the ego seem
permanently changeable and fluid. The computer-aided medialization of a
permanent fluid and volatile social presence radically breaks away from
the classical forms of social legitimization conditions, for example the
ancestry tree or the family portrait. In that sense, the ego no longer
acts as the statistic nucleus itself, but is subject to the aggregate
state of the network structure. Concomitant, the ego loses the aura of
the confirmed, universal, and important. The graphic design of the
social relationship cloud suggests that the social localization of the
ego is a collaborative process, and that the ego cannot escape the
aggregate-like state of the entire system.

## Conclusion

In liberal democratic societies, inspection procedures constitute a
dominant form and practice of knowledge.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_10] Inspection procedures are
widely recognised and usually referred to by the collective term
‘evaluation’. Evaluation is believed to be the predominant vehicle to
measure the impact of emancipation, democratisation and social equity.
Vast areas of everyday and popular culture are surrounded by a variety
of evaluation practices. In this context, not only has a new control
instrument emerged, but new forms of managing oneself and others have
arisen as well. The term ‘evaluation’ is on everyone’s lips because it
is aptly malleable and expansible and colloquially used in a meaning
somewhere along the way between ‘assessing’ and ‘grading’. The social
media of web 2.0 play an important role in the current boom of
evaluation.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_11] In other words, the Internet has born a communication
culture of mutual and permanent evaluation, which takes hold of the
entire social and cultural space and often adopts the form of
entrepreneurial practices.

Everyday and popular culture is flooded to a large extent by a multitude
of performance determination methods, verification procedures,
diagnostic methods and personality tests.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_12] Evaluations, testing
procedures, questionnaires and statistics have become the norm on the
Internet as well, where they influence how we think, perceive, work,
remember and communicate. Feedback systems, performance comparisons,
quality rankings, monitoring, matching, benchmarking, statistical
controls, flexible process control, self-awareness catalysts,
satisfaction surveys – all of these systemic-cybernetic control
functions and observatory connections of mutual assessment and judgement
are functional elements of media technology in web 2.0. Applications of
post-disciplinary web 2.0 technologies are based on a cybernetic model
which presupposes the individual as a system that processes information
and adapts as flexibly as possible to existing standards set by its
environment as long as it continues to be ‘informed’ by responses
(feedback).[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_13] The ‘informational control’ of vast parts of society by
means of search and analysis engines is a power mode of its own, which
is based on the logic of self-organisation, interconnectedness and
feedback, and results in media-specific forms of subjectification:
Instead of regulating individuals directly, which would bring about vast
amounts of overhead, feedback loops are installed to signal to the
individual when aberrations of the norm occur. In the field of online
media, the “conduct of conduct” as identified by Michel Foucault[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_14] as
the key formula for the exercise of power takes the shape of control via
feedback-driven self-control.

When an individual observes themselves or others, continuous feedback
creates a cycle of mutual observation, on the basis of which adaptations
are possible and interventions can be planned.[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_15] In this context, the
individual is supposed to be able to perceive specific effects and, at
the same time, the causes of these effects. This indicates a
characteristic understanding of causality, i.e. a systemic-cybernetic
observatory connection constituted by creating control cycles in the
form of feedback loops, which can be used to regulate either oneself or
others, depending on the direction the observation takes. Expanding
systemic-cybernetic control functions in web 2.0 raises issues
concerning systems and models, regulation, circular causality, feedback,
equilibrium, adaptation and control. The required adaptations do not
suggest to those controlled to achieve a certain ideal value. The
control technology of ‘gentle adaptation’ attempts to set an
interminable dynamic of self-optimisation in motion, which is supposed
to be produced by the subject him- or herself within the boundaries of
his or her own individual initiative and self-responsibility.

Accordingly, a new kind of dynamic of informatisation of self-practices
begins to emerge against the backdrop of global distribution of
web-based applications and of administrative institutions strategically
opening up towards systems of open knowledge. Not unlike scientific
evaluation, everyday evaluation presupposes the option of changing and
controlling the behaviour of the subjects involved. Response systems and
feedback loops suggest that the subjects be shaped to a certain extent
in order to become socially effective. Their technological scheme aims
to assert knowledge on the level of everyday practices. Response systems
will turn ‘general everyday perception’ into ‘structural monitoring’
used to systematically observe, score, judge and successfully change a
certain kind of behaviour. Feedback systems can substantially help
activate practices of evaluative self-observation. However, manifold
codes of observatory knowledge based on ‘objectifying’ and
‘neutralising’ knowledge technologies cannot belie the fact that every
kind of knowledge has inherent social and normative concepts and is
fundamentally dependent on political and economic contexts.

## References

Agamben, Giorgio. *The Coming Community*. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1993.

Andrejevic, Mark. ‘Surveillance and Alienation in the Online Economy’,
*Surveillance & Society*, 8/3 (2011): 278-287.

Causey, Matthew. *Theatre and Performance in Digital Culture: From
Simulation to Embeddedness*, London/New York: Routledge, 2006.

Christensen, Christian. ‘Discourses of Technology and Liberation: State
Aid to Net Activists in an Era of ‘Twitter Revolutions’, *The
Communication Review* 14 (2011): 233-253.

Dodge, Martin and Kitchin, Rob. *Mapping Cyberspace*, London: Routledge,
2000.

Foucault, Michel. *Dits et écrits IV*, Paris: Gallimard, 1994.

Gartner, Georg. ‘Internet Cartography and Web Mapping’. *International
Handbook Military Geography* 41.7 (2006): 416-432.

Heer, Jeffrey and boyd, danah. *‘Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
Networks’*, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. Minneapolis,
Minnesota, October 23-25, 2005.

Henry, Nathalie and Fekete, Jean-Daniel. ‘Visualization and Computer
Graphics’, *IEEE Transactions* 12.5 (2006): 677-684.

Nomata, Yuya and Hoshino, Junichi. ‘Social Landscapes: Visual Interface
to Improve Awareness in Human Relationships on Social Networking Sites’.
*ICEC*, Volume 4161, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Ed. Richard
Harper, Matthias Rauterberg, Marco Combetto, New York: Springer, 2006.

Reichert, Ramón. *Amateure im Netz. Selbstmanagement und Wissenstechnik
im Web 2.0*, Bielefeld: transcript, 2008.

Reichert, Ramón. ‘Social Media Storytelling’, in: Bernd Kracke, Marc
Ries (eds.): *Expanded Narration*, Bielefeld: transcript, 2013.

Strathern, Marilyn. *Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in
Accountability, Ethics and the Academy*, London: Routledge, 2000.

Wolfgang, Ernst. Jenseits des Archivs: Bit Mapping. 2007. Web 15 April
2014.
<http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/themen/mapping_und_text/jenseits-des-archivs/>.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_1]: Wolfgang Ernst, Jenseits des Archivs: Bit Mapping, 2007.
    <http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/themen/medienkunst_im_ueberblick/>

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_2]: Ramón Reichert, *Amateure im Netz. Selbstmanagement und
    Wissenstechnik im Web 2.0*, Bielefeld: transcript, 2008, pp. 124-129.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_3]: Marilyn Strathern, *Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in
    Accountability, Ethics and the Academy*, London: Routledge, 2000, p.
    15f.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_4]: Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin, *Mapping Cyberspace*, London: Routledge, 2000, p. 22.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_5]: Georg Gartner, ‘Internet Cartography and Web Mapping’,
    *International Handbook Military Geography* 41.7 (2006): 416-432.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_6]: Jeffrey Heer and danah boyd, ‘Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
    Networks.’ IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. Minneapolis,
    Minnesota, October 23-25, 2005.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_7]: Yuya Nomata and Junichi Hoshino. ‘Social Landscapes: Visual
    Interface to Improve Awareness in Human Relationships on Social
    Networking Sites’. ICEC, Volume 4161, Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science. Ed. Richard Harper, Matthias Rauterberg, Marco Combetto,
    New York, Springer, 2006, pp. 350-353.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_8]: Nathalie Henry and Jean-Daniel Fekete, ‘Visualization and Computer
    Graphics’, IEEE Transactions 12.5 (2006): 677-684.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_9]: Jeffrey Heer and danah boyd, ‘Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
    Networks.’ IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. Minneapolis,
    Minnesota, October 23-25, 2005, p.2.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_10]: Giorgio Agamben, *The Coming Community*, Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 1993.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_11]: Mark Andrejevic. ‘Surveillance and alienation in the online
    economy’, *Surveillance & Society* 8/3 (2011): 278-287.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_12]: Christian Christensen ‘Discourses of Technology and Liberation:
    State Aid to Net Activists in an Era of ‘Twitter Revolutions’, *The
    Communication Review* 14 (2011): 233-253.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_13]: Ramón Reichert, ‘Social Media Storytelling’. Expanded Narration.
    Ed. Bernd Kracke, Marc Ries, Bielefeld: transcript, 2013,
    pp. 341-358.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_14]: Michel Foucault,*Dits et écrits IV*, Paris: Gallimard, 1994,
    p. 237.

[^4_Reichert_Dating_Maps_15]: Matthew Causey, *Theatre and Performance in Digital Culture: From
    Simulation to Embeddedness*, London/New York: Routledge, 2006.
