---
Pr-id: Publications  
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 16  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: Online Courship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, H. G Cocks, Murat Akser, Ramón Reichert, Diego Basile, Joaquín Linne, Lázaro M. Bacallao Pino, Cláudia Casimiro, Pascal Lardellier, Caiyun Wen, Sheena Raja and Bryce J. Renninger, Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi, David Levin, Gabriele de Seta, Ge Zhang, Tao Fu, Aras Ozgun, Megan Lindsay, Enver Ozustun. 
Author-email: alevdegim@siu.edu
Author-bio: about the author  
Editor: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu
Abstract: Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives. 
The research decodes the approach to online dating in various countries like France, India, China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.   
Keywords: online dating, social media, Institute of Network Cultures, print on demand, digital media, media theory, sociology, humanities, new media, France, India, China, Portugal, USA, methodologies, match.com, courtship, traditional, differences, Turkey, interactions, romantic, partners, search, love, facebook. 
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...

# The Virtual Nightclub: Adolescents from Low-Income Sectors Search for Their Couples through Facebook

### Diego Basile and Joaquín Linne

## Introduction

Along with the popularization of Internet produced in the first decade
of the century, the ways of obtaining knowledge and youth socialization
has changed. As Manuel Castells argued, this social-computer revolution
has also changed the way we think about love and sexuality and has
contributed in the transformation expressed in the ways we relate with
others and the imaginaries believed regarding dating. This is why we
understand the multiple strategies that adolescents carry on to appear
attractive compared to others, trying to seduce, conquer and establish
emotional, romantic and sexual relationships. That is why in this
qualitative study we explore the online matchmaking practices performed
by adolescents from low-income sectors (from here on LIS) of the City of
Buenos Aires. We have investigated these practices and their
representations about love and sexuality following these questions: what
seduction strategies are deployed through the Internet? What
relationship exists between images and texts of self-presentation with
the construction of gender? What data is provided in virtual social
networks? What are the advantages and disadvantages of meeting a partner
through Internet? What are the expectations while searching for a couple
through Internet?

Among the more than one hundred million active users that Facebook (FB)
has, Argentines are in twelfth place with over twenty-two million
users.[^5_Basile_Linne_1] In this multi-platform, adolescents are more numerous and
active regarding the publication of personal photos. This can be
explained to some extent by their elevated free time, their digital
native condition[^5_Basile_Linne_2] and, also, because they are living a stage of
experimentation and identity construction in which they find this
platform especially useful and satisfactory. Unlike the “Kodak
culture”,[^5_Basile_Linne_3] mobile digital technologies allow photographic exploration
and visual-identity configuration to be recorded and tested by the
community.

On the other hand, we find that one of the justifications for this
research is that the pioneering concepts used to describe adolescents
have begun to lose sense. A more complex analysis from a sociological
perspective is necessary to analyze the ways in which society makes use
of ICT. With this intention, our work focuses on the LIS, and their
gender differences. While we use these categories in a general way, we
note that the uses of the Internet in the LIS have specific differences
that the concepts of digital natives and digital immigrants (Prensky,
2001) cannot distinguish them satisfactorily.

We also find it necessary to contribute in the research of LIS
adolescents because they are one of the populations with more
difficulties: the economic, social, educational and housing difficulties
are often shared with other problems such as social stigma, gender
violence, addictions and early pregnancy. Apart from the difficulties
often faced, their daily lives include various activities: going to
school, having jobs in poor labor conditions (temporally, not
registered), taking care of the children of the family, and, in some
cases, work and participate in art, sports, crafts and computers
workshops. In their free time they get together with friends, chat on
Whatsapp and send text messages over the cell phone, entertain
themselves with the “Play”,[^5_Basile_Linne_4] they watch audiovisual content online,
display, take and edit photos, and use social network sites. In this
context, FB appears as their main entertainment and communication media.

## Methodology

Fieldwork consisted of observations and twenty in-depth interviews to
adolescents of LIS in schools, commercial *spots* with Internet and
community centers, as well as virtual observations through FB. We define
LIS adolescents as adolescents who are between 12 and 18 years old,
whose parents have not finish high school and lack in their homes of at
least one basic social service (such as water or gas).

A significant part of the fieldwork was possible due to our performance
as volunteer teachers in the computer workshop *Conviven*, located in
the streets *Murgiondo* and *Avenida Eva Perón* (neighborhood called
*Lugano*, South Zone of the City). During 2011 and 2012 we went to this
workshop where we made participant observations and interviews to
adolescents from LIS. By doing so we were able to approach in their
daily communication and self-presentation practices through their
technological environments.

Finally, using the “snowball” method implemented by our key informants
of the community center, we created an ad hoc profile on FB that
currently has more than 2,500 contacts (mostly adolescents of the LIS of
City of Buenos Aires). These virtual observations that we develop during
two years (2012-2013), allowed us to investigate the practices of
sociability and the strategies that adolescents display while searching
for a couple and seducing others by publishing text and personal images
on the network.

## Adolescents, digital natives and multitasking

Studies about new technologies and the Internet have elaborated
​​categories that contributed in fighting against conservative positions
in various areas –such as academic, educational and intellectual– that
opposed strong resistance to such innovations and did not allow them to
display their potentials. Following this line of thought, the category
“natives and digital immigrants” was useful to start talking about this
new way of communication.

The simplicity, easiness and 'naturalness' that adolescents have in
managing Internet clearly define them as digital natives. They were born
after 1990, being raised along with multimedia tools, but especially
“breathing the Internet atmosphere”[^5_Basile_Linne_5]. This new generation is
considered a “native” speaker of the language of computers, video games
and the Internet. The “digital natives” are also defined as “Generation
@”[^5_Basile_Linne_6] or “multi-media generation”.[^5_Basile_Linne_7]

Multitasking category, definition shared by most adolescents, refers to
the ability to perform multiple tasks at the same time on different
screens or interfaces within a single screen. This concept serves to
exemplify the use of dichotomous categories, since it is an actual
practice of digital natives, which is absent in immigrants.

> The computer has over passed television in its capacity as totem, but
> with the difference that the “digital natives” project on this device
> a lot of expectations, tied to entertainment such as games,
> experimentation, learning and sociality, to the point that they
> consider the computer as part of their identity.[^5_Basile_Linne_8]

These categories of digital natives are starting to lose their
explanatory potential, but we still find them useful to frame some
characteristics shared by the contemporary generation of adolescents.
Let’s focus now on our specific topic for this research, practices and
representations of adolescents of LIS of the City of Buenos Aires while
searching for a date online.

## Results

### Searching for a couple on Facebook

In a way FB has helped to create millions of couples but has also
contributed to the dissolution of many others. Since the platform keeps
track of all actions that create users (and this record is often
available to the public), users can, easily, monitor the actions of
others. This ability to monitor or control, as well as the simplicity in
tracking down ex lovers, affairs or potential couples, becomes a sort of
multilateral surveillance, at least in part, it is symptomatic to what
Bauman[^5_Basile_Linne_9] calls “ liquid relationships “, in the sense that adolescents
tend to have relationships with high levels of mobility and instability.
However, this does not imply that future generations live in a spirality
of sex and extreme experiences. In this respect, Lipovetsky states:

In mass culture eroticism is widespread and all the love “positions” are
legitimate, but actual sexual practices are usually not risky, nor
diversified: multiple sex, exchange, sodomy, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse with someone you just met are still minority
experiences.[^5_Basile_Linne_10]

We have observed in our fieldwork that while there is greater visibility
of new practices and new ways of presenting the bodies through images,
as well as increased exhibitionism stories and visual esthetics,
attitudes prevalent in most adolescents through FB usually show that
they take care of themselves by controlling what is visible and the
selection of significant contacts.

Adolescent interactions are conducted in a daily life continually
related to social networks, where the practices are multitasking: while
performing simultaneous tasks around screens, also in many cases –both
male and women– activate searches for couples in parallel or explore
different emotional erotic relationships. In this new practice, while
men tend to be popular and successful in and out of FB, women tend to be
more challenged by their gender, who accuses them of “easy girls “ or “
boyfriend stealers.”

> In the computer workshop, a girl of Bolivian nationality watches
> videos of hip hop that ​​her boyfriend made for her. Her other
> colleagues are envious and tell her to never leave him, another
> adolescent is chatting on FB in a passionate way with her boyfriend
> (because the mother discovered the relationship and forbade her to see
> him, so now they only communicate by chat and text messages), another
> girl adds digital effects like stars and glitter to her photo album on
> FB, a teenage male sees photos and profiles of girls and sends them
> friend requests, another one watches goals from Messi on Youtube.[^5_Basile_Linne_11]

Adolescents perform all these activities as they check all the time
their profile on the social network. This combined use of networks,
sociability and everyday life, for example in an educational
environment, is often more “natural” for teens than for adults. They are
who prefer FB as a platform for convergence of communication and
entertainment, while adults prefer –even when they use Internet– to
separate their places of recreation and erotic-emotional sociality.
While adults over forty tend to search for a couple through dating sites
and contacts (where they feel it is easier to refine the search for the
other), youth and adolescents have FB as their main matchmaker.

### Strategies

In a context where social networks, communication, and entertainment
with friends and classmates are part of daily activity, adolescents use
FB when searching for a couple. To do so, they develop presentation
strategies towards others. In the presentation they display of
themselves in FB, both central elements that can be viewed first in
their profile are the cover photo and the profile picture. In most
cases, they are personal pictures, of themselves, either alone, with
intimate friends or with their family members.

Pictures posted about their bodies – usually ‘selfies’ – are central in
the configuration of their online ID. With these pictures they show
themselves to others exposing photos they consider the most attractive,
in hope for feedback from their peers’ community. Through comments that
they write and receive from others, the daily sociability is displayed.
In certain cases, this dynamic is explicit, for example in pictures of
esthetic duels between two friends. These sets of personal pictures
specifically search for the approval of adolescents as desired bodies
and “legitimate bodies”[^5_Basile_Linne_12]. A ludic strategy regarding this issue is
holding an esthetic duel between intimate friends. A few hours after the
post, feedback of their peers’ community will give their verdict
expressing them in how many “likes” and quality and quantity of
comments. Both images and personal texts can be commented. Through
“likes”, and “signatures” of timelines and emoticons, they give sense to
personal posts, assigning them as attractive or desired, or indifferent
and ignored inside their community. For example, a girl asks her
audience (the network), as if she was in a beauty contest, to qualify
her: “From 1 to 10, what’s my rating?”

Regarding the written discourse, information is provided related to the
place of residence, age, where you study or work and relationship
status, which complement the ID configuration of adolescents in their
respective profiles. FB defines certain characteristics to describe a
relationship status (in this order: single, in a relationship, engaged,
married, it’s complicated, in an open relationship). When the
relationship status is modified by the user, it is posted as a novelty
in the wall of their contacts. These status updates work as a public
manifestation of the starting point or dissolution of a relationship,
and being or not available for seduction and dating. Posting these
“relationship status” helps multilateral surveillance and horizontal
monitoring between themselves. When someone posts that a friend has
started or ended a relationship, it usually brings out many comments
which express the sociability inside their friendship groups.

What is new regarding the ways adolescents present themselves? Unlike
previous generations, they display, through textual and audiovisual
fragments of their daily life, a “visual autobiography”[^5_Basile_Linne_13] in their FB
profile. From the daily practice of personal pictures, posting and
commentating on them, they choose what to show and monitor their
profiles and their group of peers in search of creating their best
presentation possible. This skill is not spontaneous since it is the
result of the experience in the use of a social network and what they
learn with other adolescents. By having much more control over the
impressions they choose to expose in front of others,[^5_Basile_Linne_14] the sites of
social networks like FB allow them to present a very selective version
of themselves. Therefore, they often expose positive aspects of their
intimacy on the network. In LIS, personal photos of adolescents with
their son or daughter are frequent. At the same time that they expose
their condition of parents, they take care of their image and are still
active in the game of seduction. For example, they put make up on, comb
themselves with dedication and pick out carefully their wardrobe and the
angle of the camera, and at the same time present their baby “in
society” (in the net).

There are certain differences in the forms of presentation of women and
men in this daily practice. Women adolescents concentrate, on one side,
in the search of a boy that satisfies with the expectancies of
commitment, activities, projects and attraction, and on the other hand,
in becoming *femme fatales* with a high grade of autonomy regarding the
exclusivity that a monogamous couple demands. While this poses a high
rhetorical component, because it’s a performance that both boys and
girls want to represent, and at the same time celebrate in posts of
others, this ambivalent posture regarding traditional representations of
gender is usually a constant in most profiles and walls of adolescents.

At the same time, boys concentrate in the search and seduction of
feminine contacts with whom to explore their sexuality, but also aspire
in having a stable couple, a girl that is “faithful, loving, romantic
and a family person”. Even though this also forms part of a personal
marketing, it also has an honest message and an expression of desire.
These messages are inserted inside an environment where their main idea
is to seduce others by showing what they consider is their best image.
By multimedia, chat, private messages and posts of others and their own
ones, they generate ingenious or romantic messages under the format of
texts, pictures, memes, video clips and animations.

### Advantages

From the adolescent’s point of view, the search of a couple in FB has
both advantages and disadvantages. When we asked the adolescents we
interviewed about what they consider are the advantages of meeting a
couple on FB, they responded in diverse ways. On one side, adolescents
value the possibility of knowing aspects of the other person before
deciding to meet (“you can get to know him-her and see him-her before
meeting in person”; “you know all about them”; “FB shows everything you
like and you get to know each other better”). On the other side, they
are aware that the Net helps them build their own image (“you can show
yourself different to others”).

Nevertheless, they point out that it is “easier” meeting people this
way; that it generates a lower grade of inhibition to communicate and
establish bonds (“maybe you get to meet him/her better”; “while you’re
getting to know him-her you can have a better communication”; “perhaps
you can say things that if he/she were in front of you, you wouldn’t
dare say”); that they can meet people from different neighborhoods and
cities (“the possibility to meet people from a remote location”); for
them to learn communicating and observing the communication of others
(“they teach you strategies and give you tips to speak to others”). As a
result, the social network operates as a location and an instance of
socialization, since adolescents socialise with their peers meanwhile
they learn from observing the most popular posts which are the code
lines and models to follow in search of a couple.

### Disadvantages

When asked about the disadvantages of meeting a couple on FB, women
responses present more concern than men. In social networks, the “other”
–primarily the other unknown– can lie about some important aspects of
his/her identity. In regard of the place of residence, there are two
attitudes towards this. On one hand, the concealment, because this
information is a strong reference that may be seen as an obstacle
regarding the possibilities of building a relationship; stigmatized
neighborhoods with low resources, those who port a negative sense,
usually are not present in adolescents “profiles”, which provokes a
great deal of confusion in the expectancies of others. But this
concealment of their place of residence is not an exclusive
characteristic in the use of networks, since is also a generalized
practice in which LIS evaluate the costs and benefits that carry on the
presentation of such stigmatised information.

On the other hand, it is necessary to qualify the stigma of being
“villero” or living in a humble neighborhood, because the same
adolescents, in different cases, defend the culture of the ghetto, or
their neighborhood. Both boys as girls add “ghetto”, “villera” or
another neighborhood identity reference next to their names or nicknames
in FB. They also add a reference to their neighborhood with their name
(for example, “Mtd” is a contraction for the neighborhood *Mataderos*,
or “Lgn” contraction of the neighborhood *Lugano*). This territorial
reference that they include in their profile name operates in a way that
anchors their identity and sociability inside the website. Even though
any user can interact with anyone and there are inter-neighborhoods and
inter-classist contacts, most of the contacts are between users of
close, if not the same territory and the same or similar social
class-sector.

For adolescents from LIS the neighborhood is a strong identity mark from
which they build their online profile. In a way of territorial and
culture claim, they redeem their place of belonging and the values that
they associate to it, as for example “bravery”, “loyalty”,
“perseverance”, “resistance” and “history”. Sociability in Internet is
not generated in an ubiquitous way, since it is produced, in most cases,
between equals that live in the same territory, and claim the same
neighborhood and share similar social conditions.[^5_Basile_Linne_15]

On the other hand, meanwhile teenage girls of LIS have fears related to
their psychical integrity (“he can be a rapist”; “he can rob you”), boys
have fears related to the loss of autonomy (“if you have a girlfriend
she controls everything you do in FB”; “you lose your liberty because
they’re controlling all your posts”). This fear has started to appear
also in a recurring way in the timelines of teenage LIS girls.

Both boys as girls of our research agree on the inconvenient of meeting
people through FB: in first place, they point out that you’re always
going to have a superficial and selective knowledge of the other person;
in second place, the person can fail you on the date, or being someone
very different from the identity built in the social network. The
testimonies show that, even though the platform is an essential tool to
search for a couple, it also possess its risks and disadvantages,
because a performance is built up that not always meets the identity in
person. These gaps between virtual and physical performance generate
diverse daily problems in adolescents: from a couple that finds very
difficult to trespass the fluidity of their virtual communication to the
physical terrain, to the jealousy because one acts like he/she is single
on FB, or the sensation of not being valued or acknowledged by the other
person in any level. For example, an adolescent of 15 years old from
*Lugano* told us about her relationship: “when we were online everything
was fine and on weekends too, but later in the week he didn’t pay
attention to me, never calls, he is an idiot.”

### The Virtual Nightclub

Considering all these aspects, we can think of the social network as a
virtual nightclub. There is a difference between the traditional modes
of searching for a couple, and the new forms develop from the
interactions in the net. In this sense, we shall emphasize some of the
characteristics of the virtual nightclub:

-   It is open 24 hours: the platform works in a never ending way,
    without interruptions, it is a space where you can leave messages to
    a specific user or to a set of contacts. Since communication is
    mostly delayed, it is not necessary that both emissary and receptor
    be active. This way, whoever wants to start a conversation, makes a
    comment or sends a private message or “like” during any part of the
    day.

-   Access is free: Anyone who has Internet and is willing to give
    certain personal information can interact with another sending and
    accepting “friend requests”. The access is free because nobody
    controls the admission to the Internet; no one is “kicked out” of a
    place due to his-her appearance, manner of dressing or footwear. In
    this sense, adolescents prefer the security and the free-of-charge
    net communication from those in a private club or store where there
    is usually an entrance fee, a dressing way is required and sometimes
    disputes between peer groups are displayed.

-   The presentation in front of others: it doesn’t require the ability
    that demands the face to face protocol, neither the management of
    gestures or body-language on scene. For example, knowing or not
    knowing how to dance will not affect the possibilities of the
    candidates. Or being nervous in front of the presence of others will
    not affect the performance of the virtual seduction that every user
    displays. On the contrary, practice of showing oneself to others
    counts with the possibility of making a slow, meditated and
    selective work in the elaboration and sharing of pictures as well as
    in the comments. In this way, the ability that the user has to
    express himself in FB, is exercised and consolidated with the use of
    the net.

-   The approaching of strangers: is one of the newest aspects, because
    by sharing the contacts of “friends of friends” (concept in FB) it’s
    much easier to approach others that rapidly can contact themselves.
    Once the friend request is accepted, it is possible to elaborate an
    idea of the tastes and preferences of that person, see their group
    of friends and their families. The chat works as an intermediate
    instance between delayed communication and face-to-face encounters.
    Within the chat there is a sense of uncertainty expressed in
    spontaneous communication. Rapidly, a user can obtain a general
    scope of the tastes and preferences of a stranger from a distance.

Especially for shy people, the possibility of previous communication is
an advantage. The sociability in the social network eases the trial and
error without the pressure of a face-to-face situation. Said in another
way, it generates less inhibition because of the “semi-anonymity”
(acquaintances of acquaintances that haven’t met in person) or because
interactions are not “one to one”. At the same time, a great advantage
for adolescents, which usually are less experimented in interpersonal
erotic-affective relationships, is the possibility of learning through
the observation of others attitudes, posts and comments. In this way, FB
operates as an instance of loving socialization, since it provides
contacts to interact and learn from: they are the profiles, walls and
posts of their most exhibitionist, effective, popular and self-confident
peers whom operate as “style manual” and provide a guide of instructions
for seduction, presentation and affective expressions, of what is liked
and disliked, pictures or images and words that “fall in love” or those
that produce indifference.

To be an outstanding person in the “virtual nightclub” one must have a
high level of visibility. Adolescents know how to accomplish this:
“signing” dozens, hundreds and even thousands of timelines/walls, but
above all having a lot of “signatures” (comments), likes, subscriptions
and mentions of others. This is why there is a permanent search in
accomplishing this visibility, and for that they gather their peers to
leave their signatures in their own timeline. This usually occurs as an
interchange: you sign my wall and I’ll sign yours, as observed in the
following example:

The step towards a face-to-face encounter: this step usually implicates
a high risk. When they meet face to face, it’s much more difficult to
conceal nerves, anxiety, desires and fear of rejection. Besides the fear
of deception through false identities and the possibility of concrete
danger by thefts and physical assaults, adolescents also fear that the
person won’t fulfill their expectancy generated online. In this sense, a
great performance capacity is possible thanks to the network, ability
that adolescents value and exploit to the maximum, comes with an
important setback: the possibility of deception when they meet face to
face. In other words, FB facilitates enormously the “first approach”
but, at the same time, makes it much more difficult the rupture of the
tension in a face to face encounter, which adolescents declare when they
express their fear of “not knowing who the other really is”.

## Conclusions

Just like before the massification of Internet, girls try to decode what
message\
– and which candidates – are most suitable for dating, and the boys do
their best to show them that they are the best choice. But what has
changed with the popular use of 2.0 technologies and in particular with
the existence of different online communities regarding neighborhood,
age-based and cultural affinities? One change we observe about Internet
is linked to the proliferation of desire and the variety of images of
possible partners. Like a virtual nightclub (without a define body or
territory), adolescents start out chatting trying to lead the
relationship to a higher stage of intimacy. Therefore, social spaces
such as school, parks, bars and nightclub spaces are overlap with a
virtual sociability regarding FB, chat channels and instant messaging
services.

We have made an exploratory journey about the seduction and matchmaking
strategies carried out by LIS adolescents of the City of Buenos Aires
regarding FB. We point out here the importance of digital photography
used for their presentation, as well as for the sociability expressed
through the comments of the pictures. We also note that the statements
of “relationship status” are central regarding relationships. We focused
on the importance that adolescents give to their profiles trying to make
them have high visibility and the ways they carry out this objective.

Finally, we have described the main advantages and disadvantages
mentioned by LIS adolescents about meeting a couple in FB. We note here
the importance of knowledge of their tastes and preferences as well as
how to anticipate a first approach. We also identify the fear of meeting
face to face and the lack of trust regarding what is presented as “true”
in the profiles. In conclusion, we define the social network as a
“virtual nightclub”, to highlight the changes that have occurred in the
ways of social interaction between adolescents regarding matchmaking.

## References

Albarello, Francisco. *Leer y navegar en Internet*, Buenos Aires: La
Crujía, 2011.

Bauman, Zigmunt. *Liquid Modernity*, Cambridge: Polity, 2000.

Beck, Ulrich. *Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity*, London: Sage, 1992.

Bouille, Julieta. ‘Cibercafés o la nueva esquina. Usos y apropiaciones
de Internet en jóvenes de sectores populares’, in Urresti, M. (ed.),
*Ciberculturas juveniles*, Buenos Aires: La Crujía, 2008, pp. 105-120.

Butler, Judith. *Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex”*, Cambridge: Psychology Press, 1993.

Castells, Manuel. *Communication Power*, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2009.

Chalfen, Richard. *Snapshots Versions of Life*, Ohio: University Popular
Press, 1987.

Goffman, Erving. *The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life*, New York:
Anchor Books, 1959.

Igarza, Roberto. *Burbujas de Ocio*, Buenos Aires: La Crujía, 2009.

Internet World Stats, <http://www.Internetworldstats.com>

Linne, Joaquín. Adolescentes y redes sociales. Usos y apropiaciones de
Facebook en sectores populares de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires (Adolescents
& social networking. *Uses and appropiations of Facebook in low-income
sectors of the City of Buenos Aires)*, Master thesis unpublished, Faculty
of Social Sciences, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 2013.

Lipovetsky, Gilles. *El crepúsculo del deber, trans. Juana Bignozzi*,
Barcelona: Anagrama, 1994.

Mendelson, Andrew & Papacharissi, Zizi. ‘Look at us: Collective
Narcissism in College Student Facebook PhotoGalleries’, in Papacharissi,
Z. (ed.), *The Networked Self: Identity, Community and Culture on Social
Network Sites*. Illinois: Routledge, 2010.

Morduchowicz, Roxana. *La generación multimedia. Significados, consumos y
prácticas culturales de los jóvenes*, Buenos Aires: Paidós, 2008.

Piscitelli, Alejandro. *Nativos Digitales*, Buenos Aires: Santillana,
2009.

Prensky, Marc, ‘Digital Natives, Digital Inmigrants’, *On the Horizon*,
9.5 (2001): 1-6.

Social Bakers,
[socialbakers.com](http://www.socialbakers.com/)

Urresti, Marcelo. ‘Ciberculturas juveniles: vida cotidiana, subjetividad
y pertenencia entre los jóvenes ante el impacto de las nuevas
tecnologías de la comunicación y la información’, in Urresti, Marcelo
(ed.), *Ciberculturas juveniles* (pp. 18-49). Buenos Aires: La Crujía,
2008.

[^5_Basile_Linne_1]: Internet World Stats,
    <http://www.internetworldstats.com>.

[^5_Basile_Linne_2]: Marc Prensky, ‘Digital Natives, Digital Inmigrants’, *On the
    Horizon* 9.5 (2001): 1-6.

[^5_Basile_Linne_3]: Richard Chalfen, *Snapshots Versions of Life*, Ohio: University
    Popular Press, 1987.

[^5_Basile_Linne_4]: Meaning Playstation, a well-known brand of videogames.

[^5_Basile_Linne_5]: Manuel Castells, *Communication Power*, Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 2009.

[^5_Basile_Linne_6]: Alejandro Piscitelli, *Nativos digitales*, Buenos Aires: Santillana,
    2009.

[^5_Basile_Linne_7]: Roxana Morduchowicz, *La generación multimedia. Significados,
    consumos y prácticas culturales de los jóvenes*, Buenos Aires:
    Paidós, 2008.

[^5_Basile_Linne_8]: Francisco Albarello, *Leer y navegar en Internet*, Buenos Aires: La
    Crujía, 2011.

[^5_Basile_Linne_9]: Zigmunt Bauman, *Liquid Modernity*, Cambridge: Polity, 2000.

[^5_Basile_Linne_10]: Gilles Lipovetsky, *El crepúsculo del deber*, Barcelona: Anagrama,
    1994.

[^5_Basile_Linne_11]: Joaquín Linne, Adolescentes y redes sociales. Usos y
    apropiaciones de Facebook en sectores populares de la Ciudad de
    Buenos Aires (Adolescents & social networking. *Uses and appropiations of Facebook in low-income sectors of the City of Buenos Aires)*, Master thesis unpublished, Faculty of Social
    Sciences, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 2013.

[^5_Basile_Linne_12]: Judith Butler, *Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of
    “Sex”*, Psychology Press: Cambridge, 1993.

[^5_Basile_Linne_13]: Andrew Mendelson and Zizi Papacharissi, ‘Look at Us: Collective
    Narcissism in College Student Facebook PhotoGalleries’, in
    Papacharissi, Z. (ed.), *The Networked Self: Identity, Community and
    Culture on Social Network Sites*. Illinois: Routledge, 2010.

[^5_Basile_Linne_14]: Erving Goffman, *The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life*, New
    York: Anchor Books, 1959.

[^5_Basile_Linne_15]: Joaquín Linne, Adolescentes y redes sociales. Usos y
    apropiaciones de Facebook en sectores populares de la Ciudad de
    Buenos Aires.
