---
Pr-id: Publications  
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 16  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: Online Courship: Interpersonal Interactions Across Borders  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, H. G Cocks, Murat Akser, Ramón Reichert, Diego Basile, Joaquín Linne, Lázaro M. Bacallao Pino, Cláudia Casimiro, Pascal Lardellier, Caiyun Wen, Sheena Raja and Bryce J. Renninger, Amitabh Vikram Dwivedi, David Levin, Gabriele de Seta, Ge Zhang, Tao Fu, Aras Ozgun, Megan Lindsay, Enver Ozustun. 
Author-email: alevdegim@siu.edu
Author-bio: about the author  
Editor: I. Alev Degim, James Johnson, Tao Fu
Abstract: Computer mediated interpersonal interactions are defining our daily lives as we know it. Studying this phenomenon with various methodologies, across different cultures and traditions is a crucial component in understanding social ties. This book brings together articles that approach online dating from a  range of cultural and critical perspectives. 
The research decodes the approach to online dating in various countries like France, India, China, Turkey, Cuba, USA and Portugal. Mapping the history of dating and courtship shows the evolution of these practices even before the introduction of the online medium and traces parallels and differences between old and new traditions.   
Keywords: online dating, social media, Institute of Network Cultures, print on demand, digital media, media theory, sociology, humanities, new media, France, India, China, Portugal, USA, methodologies, match.com, courtship, traditional, differences, Turkey, interactions, romantic, partners, search, love, facebook. 
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...

# Media's Effect on Online Dating Practices: Turkish TV Marriage Programs and Online Dating as a Medium

### Enver Ozustun

## Introduction

For the last 10 years, major private television networks have been
broadcasting series of highly criticized reality shows with good
ratings. As these shows continued to be screened, their large
advertisement revenue is generating controversies. These shows with
their ratings and controversial advertisement revenues are still
invading precious broadcast time to this date. The practices of the TV
shows forged the basis for the online dating community in Turkey. The
language that is used online as well as its increasing popularity is in
parallel with these TV shows. This study analyzes the TV show within the
cultural context and tying it to online dating practices.

One of the primary criticism for the TV shows was the occupation of the
valuable broadcast time that could be utilized for current issues in
Turkish society. Despite all the criticism these shows got, another
analogue to Reality TV, marriage shows currently occupy and continue to
occupy valuable broadcast time.

Just because a topic is being discussed a lot in daily life, it does not
always have a big impact on the society. Despite this, we still talk,
discuss and criticize these shows in media and other outlets that are
being broadcasted on a variety of channels. These shows are far from
being a reference to a similar occurrence in daily life, yet they still
find a way to be relevant. Online dating practices also are an important
issue of daily experience; alternative dating sites such as
Solcuolsun.com (users are primarily left leaning) or religious marriage
sites are among the biggest networks. The niche group that the sites
addresses, categorize and define the users life styles and social
status.

## Understanding the TV Marriage Shows

There are a number of reasons why these TV shows have been taking up so
much space in our agenda. Firstly, the mass media (newspapers,
magazines, radio channels and internet broadcasting) are being
controlled by a handful of broadcasting companies. Thus, a single
subject can be repeatedly published in a variety of different media
owned by a single company. As the same type of shows are being
repeatedly broadcasted on different channels of the same network, the
strength of the shows agenda increase, pushing them into our everyday
life by repetition. Television networks have also been blocking other
types of shows by filling up their daytime schedule with marriage shows
that have long screen time. Leading audience to complain about the
omnipresence of the marriage shows in every channel they watch.

While this is the strategic point in the high ratings of marriage shows,
we should not skip the audience's interest. Values that form the
traditional structure of Turkish society are still largely a taboo and
have an untouchable status. Everything related with marriage is a
curious subject in Turkish society. To put it short, these shows contain
interesting elements worthy of audiences' attention.

In conclusion, networks are being managed in a way that keep their
audience interested to a delicate subject by utilizing their affiliated
networks' advertisement power and it's capabilities.

While the power of media can be debated, let's open a parenthesis; it is
power originates from its ability to present "things" to its audience.
This "power" shapes around 2 aspects. First one is "choosing" and the
second is "presenting as you like". Roles of the television and other
mass communication methods are being increasingly questioned as society
begins to examine the ethics of how this power is being wielded.

Ratings of programs being broadcasted on television have an important
aspect in the public relations with the media, investment in its
infrastructures and its perceived cultural value. As the government
monopoly of the mass media declined after Turkey's moved towards free
market economy, the notion that a public service is being performed by
television broadcasters declined, while they began to be solely
perceived as a commercial entity. These changes shaped the contents of
broadcasts. Higher ratings results in increased advertisement of the
shows; popular shows get more screen time for higher ratings, leading to
a positive feedback loop. As Korkmaz Alemdar and İrfan Erdoğan puts it,
"Popular culture is not a consumption. It is the active building and
distribution of meanings and pleasures in the social system". [^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_1]

On top of the dubious economic relationship between political powers and
media bosses, controversy have arisen on the heavy influence of the
political establishment on the contents of the media. We can claim with
ease that the deciding factor for the broadcasting of individual
programs and networks editorial policy as a whole is to be consistent
with the dominant agenda of the sector. The primary reason for the
preservation of this consistency is because of other commercial
interests of media tycoons.

Various theories have been created since the initial widespread use of
mass communication devices on a global scale. Each of these theories
have their merits, however the impact media has on its audience is still
debatable. Judging this impact without taking other variables and social
dynamics into account will only oversimplify the problem.

In this context, before we discuss whether marriage shows have any
effect on society or not and how successful they are, we should ponder
about impact of televisions.

Rather than assessing the direct impact marriage shows broadcasted on
Turkish television has on it's audience or it's indirect impact on
society, this study aims to figure out the purpose of these shows. In
order to do this, a wider perspective is needed.

Society underwent a change as mixed economy, a foundation principle of
Turkish Republic, moved towards liberal economy. Researching a society
without taking thousands of years of culture into account would make the
microstructure/macrostructure models to rigid for practical use.
Therefore, it is vital to keep the bond between the two in mind, as this
will be of great help in the understanding the subject.

We need to investigate the aim of this process and the conditions that
it was prepared under for these heavily criticized shows on the
headlines listed below.

-Neo-Liberal Order and Social Engineering
-Marriage in the Structure of Turkish Society
-Mass Communication Devices, Media and Its Effects

## ABOUT MICROSTRUCTURE/MACROSTRUCTURE 

### Neo-Liberal Order and Social Engineering

People in Anatolia, usually dubbed as Turks, are traditional and
sentimental. Neo-liberal policies imposed after the military coup in
September 12^th^ 1981 caused a change in this society, which provides an
interesting case study for sociologists.

The magnitude of changes, which had occurred were large enough to spark
off conspiracy theories. A change that traditional Turkish-Islamic
structure and Anatolia's multi-cultural nature left marks on its
culture. It was a period where spiritual values got replaced with
material values.

Foundations of this change had been set with a strikingly hasty manner
with pro-liberal Anavatan Partisi (ANAP) coming to power shortly after
1982. Following governments didn't see any hindrances building up their
policies upon this understanding. The most important aspect of the era
was the social construct, subjected to change by the force of the newly
created free market economy. Closed and financially self-sustained
construct left its place to a relatively pro-liberty and a market where
capitals roam freely.

While liberal policies created the middle class and designed to continue
it's existence, middle class was trying to make easy profit. Through
privatization of public properties, mining rights, civil construction
industry and projects; a socio-economic imbalance was created. No longer
was social status to be measured with education or ethics, it was now
measured with money. Popular culture has successfully changed the main
goal of the individual and the society, which is the task of earning
more money indefinitely.

In 2014, 32 years since the military coup, we can feel the resulting
policies more sharply. It is suffice to look at the current
socio-economic and political state, if we were to discuss how much of
these were natural and how much of these were results of those policies
with the data we have.

It wouldn't be unrealistic to say all this strategic undertaking was for
the reconstruction of the country's political environment and social
construct. Without a shadow of a doubt, there was a big effort to create
a country that was prepared for the new socio-economic and political
landscape. Here, we have the chance to observe and study a large-scale
usage of social engineering, a term that we hear often.

Social engineering is described as a job that can manipulate the
identity of the society, it's social texture and control it's reactions,
desires, passions and hatred.

Social engineering can be done by other professions with the help of
financial support, communication and various other assistances. Also
local supporters are produced. Like Tunç Sipahi emphasized on, cultural
codes being inherited from family and learned from social circles
doesn't change the fact that they are produced. 'Consent' is produced
and masses are established in order to achieve transition of 'power' to
them.

In this context, neo-liberal system could not ignore a tool such as the
mass media considering it used all its resources towards that goal. In
the first half of 1990's, private stations started broadcasting without
any government license; in fact, the governments of that period had
preferred to turned a blind eye and at times, even supported the illegal
broadcasts, meant the missing part of social engineering was starting to
participate.

It would not be erroneous to state Turkish television networks were
formed with this mindset. In order to compete in free market, a new kind
of relationship between the broadcasters and political figures were
formed, these became the two most important components that define the
media.

It would be easier to understand the unqualified contents of television
shows, if we think about how much social support is needed for an
understanding that supports conservatism in social life and free market
in economy.

"Marriage Shows" are another product of this lower quality circle.
However, before we move on to the contents of these shows, we should
take a look at the institution of marriage in the typical Turkish family
structure.

### Marriage in the Structure of Turkish Society

Anatolia, home to a mixture of cultural values, has a dominant Turkish
identity in its geopolitical structure.

In his book, *Türkçülüğün Esasları*, Ziya Gökalp, named the Turkish
nation as "Not as a union of race, tribe, geography, politics or
volition but as a community of people that received the same teachings
of language, religion, ethics and sense of aesthetics". Yusuf Akçura,
did not use the word "race" as in the biological definition but as a
sense of culture, custom and a partnership of history.[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_2]

Historian Karal [^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_3], voiced his opinion in the foreword of Yusuf
Akçura's essay "Üç Tarz-ı Siyaset" with: "With the proposal of creating
a middle class, Yusuf Akçura had more influence on Turkish Revolutionary
movement than Ziya Gökalp".

Turkish Revolution, under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was
founded on these principles; this gave people from different cultures in
Anatolia with an official identity.

Even with it's many local properties, institution of marriage that has
been built around this common understanding continues to this day.
Although Turkish Revolution ensured many rights for women, the
institution of marriage remained patriarchal.

Another aspect of institution of marriage in Turkish family values is
that everything stays in the household. Home and marriage are viewed as
private, with the rules of law being seen as inapplicable or at the very
least, a tendency to not to put it into practice.

The third aspect of marriage is the necessity to procreate. The
continuation of lineage is not only important for the parents but for
the family of parents and even for relatives and friends. Therefore,
biological parents are not the only one entitled, it is everyone who has
a sentimental bond with it. In this case, it forces the parents to
produce children within a set timeframe, a slight preference for male
offspring has been observed.

In every society, there are different meanings associated with the
institution of marriage. While conflicting with individualism, this
institution founded on heterosexual values, transfers the conservative
values to the next generation. This is the reason why political
authorities support and defend the institution of marriage. If we
evaluate marriage over Gramsci's [^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_4] hegemony concept, it would be
clear why the authorities are putting so much importance to this
institution.

So far, we have come up with a framework for generations we define as
the middle age. With the parents' power of influence over their
children, we can safely assume that the framework we mentioned will have
an effect on the next generation.

In order to analyze young generations thoughts on life and marriage
better, Nazmi Avcı's "Toplumsal Değerler ve Gençlik"[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_5] study has much
to offer.

This study has been made on young people receiving education in Süleyman
Demirel University's faculties and two-year programs in Isparta during
the years 2005 and 2006. Accordingly;

Most important sense of value according to subjects' native region:

East-Southeast Anatolia: 48.4% a beautiful world, 46.6 percent having a
place in heaven

West Anatolia: 40% a comfortable life

Central Anatolia: 54% a beautiful world

Mediterranean : 39.8% a beautiful world, 35.7% a comfortable life

Subjects' biggest desires

Financial Independence : 44.9%

To Have a Nice Family : 26.9%

Note: 81% of female students differ from males' by concentrating on
expectations other than (house, car; being the first in every field;
financial independence) having a nice family.

Devotion to religious values

Yes, I am devoted : 51.7%

No, I am not devoted but I have faith: 32.9%

Meaning of marriage with devotion to religious values

Yes, I am devoted and I think family is a sacred institution : 53%

It is essential for the continuation of society : 42.4%

I am not devoted in any way but I have faith and I think family is
sacred : 48%

It is unnecessary : 21.4%

It is necessary : 30.2%

It is clear as the results of this study show that new generation has
conflicted views on marriage. Youth's biggest concern being uncertainty
in their future, they tend to steer for financial independence. With the
current world order and liberal economy, building up a traditional
family with what little money they earn seems impossible even without
the struggle of their everyday life.

In this current situation, with the views on traditional marriage and
the reality that we live in, there will be inevitable conflict. On one
hand: comfortable lifestyles, that young people dream of, and a happy
marriage; exploitation of labor on the other. Since the two are
contradictory, what kind of world can we promise to our younger
generations?

The best course of action for the new free market system is to avoid
creating more contradictions, which will upset and enrage the masses,
increasing the amount of populist elements.

As the mass media is one of these areas, looking at its attitude on this
matter, will without a doubt give us a new perspective to comprehend the
subject.

### Mass Communication Devices, Media and Its Effects

Debates about mass communication devices started in the 1920s, during
the rise of popular press along with the cinema and radio. Many
empirical studies were conducted in the 1930s followed by other studies
over the years.

Lazarsfeld and Merton with their publications in 1948, Horkheimer and
Adorno[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_6] with " Dialectic of Enlightenment" in 1947, Marshall McLuhan
from Canada with "Understanding Media" in 1964, F.R. Leavis often
remembered from Leavivism from 1960's United Kingdom, Stuart Hall after
Raymond Williams with his published work "Communications" and French
philosopher Jean Baudrillard on the other hand are the first names come
to mind.

These studies, containing quite different approaches to the media's
power and effect on an era's social structure, tried to solve the
relation between media and society like today.

Neil Postman summarized the influence of television on its audience in
his book[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_7] (Amusing Ourselves to Death, Public Discourse in the Age
of Show Business) in these words; "Because there are better ways to
learn the truth, they would have a healthier influence on cultures that
adopt them. My actual aim is to convince you that the decline of an
epistemology based on printed words with connection to the rise of an
epistemology based on television causes serious results for public life,
stupefying us more every passing minute."

Communication between individuals and industrial society changes the
status of social-political structure profoundly, and because of this it
seems like the communication field will continue to be a debated topic
in the future, as it has been subject to many studies in the past.
Television, arguably still the most important communication device, is
in the middle of these debates. It boldly comes inside our homes,
inviting itself with its content. Content creators and producers favor
television for this reason.

Producers who work in television aim to make the best of this
invitation. To stay long in a place you have been invited, requiring
knowledge of what the homeowner wants. We call this the 'production
approach'.

Production approach contains two elements: determining the content of
program and its technique. These can be named as 'Content Approach' and
'Effect to Purpose Approach'.

'Content Approach' is unique to public broadcasting and ignores the
demand of audience. Producer turns the information received from experts
to television shows, abiding television production principles. Purpose
of this approach is to raise awareness among people about their basic
rights and freedoms, therefore providing a better understanding of the
world.

'Effect to Purpose Approach' is unique to commercial broadcasting. It
dwells on how viewers will experience the message and what their
reactions are going to be more than content. Producer creates the
program while keeping the message in mind.

What is being done by this approach is to merge the program with
elements people can relate to therefore increasing ratings. Viewers tend
to accept information on television as long as their needs are
satisfied. So there has to be a pre-satisfaction. There is a need for
distinctive traits that will provide pre-satisfaction on television.
This will make the program appealing at least for some viewer groups.
These traits are such as; thriller, action, sexuality, comedy,
information, importance, values, reality, curiosity, innovation.
Television programs are increasing their ratings through these codes,
making them popular thus sustaining their visibility.

Whether a television program's has an economic, political, or
ideological agenda, increasing its ratings will always be one of the
primary objectives. Higher the program's ratings, the higher percentage
of the population it reaches, this will enable its agenda to permeate
into others people in the society, affecting much wider social and
political areas. The goal is to create an area of effect, not to give
information.

According to an article Jay G. Blumler and Elihu Katz published in
1974,[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_8] the viewers choose according to three expectations from the
content of television programs.

These are:

1. Cognitive demand: Viewers demand to receive information about the
society they live in and around the world.

2. Looking for an escape: The desire of the people to look for an
escape from the stress of their daily lives and to have a pleasant time.

3. Identification Function: Viewers emphasizing on something from their
lives or status.

This study is insufficient in the separation of the audience's demands
for present day. For what is information and what is entertainment isn't
so clear anymore as lines are blurred. Even worse, concepts switched
places. Of course no concept is pure; and have practical transitive
properties. However if these transitive properties start to keep
experiences from being analyzed, then it would mean serious troubles
would emerge. After this point we start to participate willingly to the
demands of ruling structure, even moving together with them. In order to
do this, the bourgeois tend to use every mechanism they have to
something other than its intended use.

Based on the last sentence; let's look at how marriage shows manage to
invade so much broadcast time and our agenda even though they don't have
high ratings and an important presence in the advertisement revenues.

## MARRIAGE SHOWS ON TURKISH TELEVISION

Instead of democratization of producing information and its spread, with
the commercialization of media, we see that it has become easier to
direct information for the powerful owners of the media.

Only certain groups collecting the main revenue of media,
advertisements, means power is also collected in these groups.
Advertisement pie in Turkey is shared between a couple big media groups.
As an example, only five television channels in Turkey hold the 68% of
total revenues from advertisements since 2010. These are:

-Doğan Medya Grubu- Kanal D (24%)
-Turkuvaz Medya-ATV (20%)
-Doğan Medya Grubu-Star TV (9%)
-Çukurova Grubu-Show TV(9%)
-FOX (7%)

The most sought out advertisement period in television is 'prime-time'
when the viewer count is at it's highest. Advertisement competition
mostly occurs during this time period. According to this, we can assume
shows broadcast during this period are the most preferred types by the
viewers.

Media Monitoring Center's research in 2008 indicated domestic soap
operas have an eye-catching dominance in genres that get the most
advertisements.

According to the research by İstanbul Chamber of Certified Public
Accountants (İSMMMO) when we look at prime time and outside prime-time
data, soap operas have 40 percent; news programs have 29 percent and
women's programs have 6 percent viewing rates. Revenues of soap operas
broadcast on prime time and women's programs broadcast outside prime
time differ greatly. For example, 70 percent of advertising revenues of
ATV in Turkey come from soap operas, while women's shows are the closest
contender with only 16 percent.

Most important viewers of these shows are women. Purposes of women's
television usage shows proportional differences compared to males.

  ------------------ ------------ ----------
                     **Female**   **Male**
  Education          3.3%         3.4%
  Entertainment      23.7%        17.8%
  News-Informatıon   29.4%        50.8%
  All                43.6%        27.9%
  Total              100.0%       100.0%
  ------------------ ------------ ----------

Why Do You Watch Television? (Distribution by Gender)

As we can see in the statistics above, television is a source of
entertainment for women, in addition to benefit the flow of
news-information and education processes. So the line between
information, processes-education and entertainment starts to disappear.
This leads us to this conclusion; women accept things popular culture
presents as information.

While Turkish people got introduced to reality shows quite late, it is
quite early for private television networks. Shortly after private
networks started broadcasting, reality shows like "Biri Bizi
Gözetliyor"(Big Brother), "Evcilik Oyunu"(Playing House),
"Gelin-Kaynana"(Bride vs. Mother-in-law) launched and marriage shows of
today followed.

First marriage show on private networks was a production presented by
Ebru Akel named '…'. Successors followed such as "Evlen Benimle" (Marry
Me) in ATV, "Ne Çıkarsa Bahtına" in Flash TV, "Su Gibi" in Fox TV,
"Desti İzdivaç" in Star TV.

In conclusion, contrary to popular opinion, although marriage shows
invade a wide period of time, they have low advertising revenues and
ratings.

At this point we should ask the first question again: what can we take
from these programs staying on air all week against all objections?

Before we try to find an answer, we should take a look at which elements
marriage shows are prepared with and what considerations they have.

### Sociological Analysis of the Shows

For most of us marriage shows are "a waste of time"; however, it is a
great research opportunity for sociologists with its subject,
participants and affairs around the marriage concept. Can these shows
give us an idea about Turkish society's approach to marriage?

Because of their participants, diversity and an open attendance, we have
an important sample group. Still, would these data be enough for us to
make correct observations? In the end we are talking about a television
show. So, let's write down the subjects below in order to make healthy
observations and analysis.

1.  Representative properties of the participants of the show, meaning
    their ability to represent their society.

2.  Participants' sincerity to show their true characters and
    identities.

Let's not forget that every television show has a design and every
design has a team working behind it. The purpose of this team is to
introduce projects suited to network broadcasting policies with the goal
of staying on air as long as possible with high ratings.

While these shows create their own target audience, they receive more
criticism than their ratings, taking up space in our agenda. These shows
achieve their real success through this conflict.

Before we touch on what this design is built upon and what it contains,
we should mention a few points about the contents and the structure of
shows.

1.  These shows have nothing to do with the arranged marriage practice
    in our custom. Arranged marriage requires certain rituals. In this
    marriage type, families come together before their children.
    Sociologist Süheyb Öğüt explains this situation: it is possible to
    claim that the matchmaking shows, recently appearing on screen, are
    to a certain extent, a modern version of the arranged marriage
    practice. However we should stress that it only corresponds to an
    arranged marriage to a certain degree. The main reason behind
    arranged marriage is because families know each other on first hand
    or indirectly.

2.  It contains an important part of characteristics of the women in its
    society. We can list these as; women seeing marriage as a salvation,
    having no financial freedom as the employment of women is
    inadequate, feeling the need to go under someone else's authority
    instead of being an individual, to have a chance to start a new life
    or even changing their social status.

3.  In these shows, family establishment is encouraged with conservatism
    instead of 'sexual revolution' that signals a new social order.
    Prof. Dr. İsmail Hakki Ünal, member of Board of Religious Affairs,
    comments are supporting this claim by saying, that it is a good
    thing marriage shows are encouraging people to marry and create
    families but while this is being done they should be careful not to
    hurt the values and morals of society.

4.  All the instruments of capitalism support institution of marriage.
    Because marriage contains all the elements needed to be captured by
    the wheels of capitalism.

5.  It is an indicator of government failure, the inability and
    unwillingness to provide social security for women. Women see their
    husbands as a social security, not their jobs, skills or government.
    Women are encouraged to be employed by their husband by not working,
    thus leaving them to their husband's mercy.

6.  Other than government, it is an important result that shows us how
    inadequate these non-governmental organizations are about woman's
    rights. Apparently civil organizations have failed their duties, if
    we look at these shows.

7.  It is interesting that there are so many participants over 50 years
    old. Thinking about marriage at this age, shows us that our elders
    are asking for a nest of their own. Elder population of Turkey which
    is around 5 million people who is over 65 years old, are looking for
    peace in marriage not in nursing homes.

8.  It is where man and women who wants to get married are defined with
    certain lines, thus standardizing family. While women search for a
    man that can take care of her and her kids, who will be good with
    her family and a husband that has to have a job and a house, while
    the men's look for a woman who is well manicured, tame and who can
    look after his kids and housework even if she has a job. In short,
    television shows, display marriage as a shelter.

9.  Both sides show an attitude complying with values like monogamy,
    neo-local (staying in a separate house from family) and official
    wedding in these shows…

As you can see, marriage shows have been designed to defend the marriage
institute and generally accepted version of the family structure, to
ensure its continuation. Television turns this into the accepted culture
for masses, therefore creating a reference for the public to reproduce
their own popular culture.

On the other hand, show doesn't ignore social changes while bringing the
traditional values to the screen. These shows have women approaching
men, asking questions and declining them. So, while they still hold
traditional values, they also have more current values. While they
increase their viewer base, they can take advantage of the conflict of
romantic and reality and be the center of discussions.

Now, let's look at how marriage shows are adapted to television under
the guidelines above. This adaptation contains the properties that make
the show watched and debated in various parts of society.

### Components of the Show and Keeping Audience Interested

There are two main components needed to make a show. One of these is the
subject of the show, idea-product and the other is the suitors, meaning
the audience.

Products of the show is the participants who wanted to marry someone,
suitors is the audience watching curiously what is happening.

Subject of the show is open to manipulation in every way. This
accordance is a system that doesn't require coercion. This is a system
formed because of the desire people have, finding a suitable partner.
Conflicts generated by this desire, carries an invaluable television
material. If we add the fact that this process is much more conflicting
in conservative societies, we can say that social interest to this will
be much more higher.

On the other hand, even though finding a partner is a private matter, it
doesn't only concern you. There are always other relevant individuals.
Like a stone dropped in water, ripples it generates will get bigger as
you move forward; meaning, curiosity, excitement, interest, faith,
desire, disappointment. Everyone who adds a feeling to this event will
witness this excitement, live it.

Finding a partner stays as a topic until after getting married and
having kids. So, that troubles in family, events and developments are
followed with interest. If the relationship didn't end in marriage,
rumors will spread, until finding a new candidate.

In short, source material itself is so powerful, variable and from life
itself, only thing left to do is to make it suitable for television
format.

Second element is the suitors, which is the audience. Audience isn't
only the witness to what they watch, they are also the intelligent
participant of it. Situations, comments about people who are exposed to
it, highly anticipated decisions, results of these decisions everything
is followed with interest. Whether it is conscious or not, conservative
system is supported and social problems get disrupted, this is how
unemployment, bribery, corruption of politics, anti-democratic
practices, etc. leaves their place to stories like abandoned women, a
widow with 5 kids, a man having been cheated on.

Audience not only cares for the problems on screen, they make
suggestions to find solutions. That is how they participate actively as
a volunteer in the designed system.

This two elements of marriage shows taken from real life, feeds the real
life with other figures. Instead of family, relatives, friends there is
a lodge. People on this lodge make comments and direct the couple, while
they are on the spotlight as well. For this reason they have to attract
the audience and couples by making right comments and giving good
directions.

Process is very simple and clear; a presenter represents authority and
directs the whole thing. Participants are under presenter's full control
and they bow down to it. This presenter-director represents the fair
order.

Show also has lawyers, psychologists and sociologists. Instead of using
their knowledge and information, these people prefer to hide behind
their titles and talk big words. So, knowledge get sacrificed for
ignorance once again. Here intuition is used instead of mind. While
keeping in mind it's target audience presenter tones simple words by
fluctuating them, grabbing you; it's like a friend came to visit you, a
neighbor or even a close relative. There is also a hidden authority
behind the presenter's warm approach like; do me a wrong and you will
pay for it. Presenter's authority on the candidates and thoughts on them
is a reason itself to watch the show.

Orchestra plays appropriate music for the show and its audience,
cheering them up. Everything is now ready for the couple to see each
other. We see a writing below the screen telling us a surprise is
waiting for us. At the same time couple move behind the opposite sides
of the screen, asking each other questions. Presenter tells us the
information they forgot to mention there. A short music break after they
ask questions to each other; then comes the comments from the other
participants on the lodge. Each comment from them gives audience a new
perspective. Participants turn comes after the comments of lodge;
audience holds their breath as the long awaited time comes. Excitement
peaks as the curtain between them opens. This is the moment we have all
been waiting for, what will the invited person say about the person he
sees for the first time? Yes or no. If the answer is yes, candidates go
to their corner where they have tea. This is the first step before they
make any more decisions. However if the answer is no, candidates
withdraw for a later time. Meanwhile viewers call and express their
interest to candidates from the lodge. If they get a positive reply
back, a date is set. During this time presenter gives examples from the
weeks before, orchestra starts playing music, songs are sung, hands are
clapped afterwards we get a new couple behind the curtain. While this
process goes on, we see a couple from weeks before getting married.

For 4 hours, same scenario repeated with different actors, audience
never gets a chance to question what they watch. They are now a part of
this game. They may have to experience the past, present and future all
at the same with intertwined messages making, while events go before
their eyes like a film. Live music, lodge, candidate couples, presenter,
subtitles, past couples decisions, surprises set for the couples who
decide to get married, viewer calls, poems, dramas told, shedding tears
and laughter. In short, those never ending marriage rituals, family
gossip, all the running around, cheerful and sad moments are reproduced
in various ways and presented to the audience. Every program is like a
condensed version of the premarital period and after.

In contrast to all its fuss, show, oversees the conservative side of the
society, presenting and reproducing the same subject to us over and over
again for hours. Many elements making show attractive for the audience
are put together precariously; however the main aspect is the marriage
process filled with questions. In this process select couples are placed
in front/back of the curtain with different demands. Viewer starts to
worry for them. Will this two person be a couple or not? Are they
fitting for each other? They got along and left together, what if they
are not right for each other? This man will only use this women or that
women is just a gold-digger...

When the base material is so rich and ready to put mental processes in
motion, this game looks like it will stay on television for years to
come. Television using its own narrative to recreate this process,
reveals a colossal drama when its' combined with the obligatory nature
of marriage. For those who accept it… We are living in a reality, where
an old social event shaped by traditional values is presented with its
design on television.

So much so, life of what is real, switch places with what should be and
stands before us as the true real. To put it briefly, our sense of
reality gets re-established. If we push a bit harder, we are going to be
able to believe a frog can turn into a prince when it's kissed.

But the story doesn't end here - it is just starting. How so?

## CLAIMS

Readings made about television ratings, shows that women programs are
watched around 6% mark. Whereas it has very striking figures on
occupying society's agenda. It becomes a topic in daily life
conversations, gets written and argued about because of its participants
or because of something they did on the show. Even commented by
politicians.

Broadcasted marriage shows in Turkey get criticism especially for:

-   For hurting the values of the marriage institution,
-   Causing insecurity with participants,
-   Taking up long screen times during daytime.

Against all criticism, another matter we should stand on, Esra Erol
presenting a show on Fox TV with her name on it, having two million
followers on her Facebook page.

What this format appeals to, what it affects and exploits is rather
obvious.

The television producers' job is to make money. Producing a show that is
watched for 4 hours with little cost is a big achievement, even a
victory, from a commercial perspective.

However the real achievement is television successfully maintaining its
hegemonic structure. These shows occupying all of television against all
criticism, exaggerated ratings and low advertising revenue is the most
important point. To maintain their permanence, new characters and
scenarios must be created. Whatever necessary must be done in order to
achieve it. Claims are often made about some participants of these shows
being hired from casting agencies.

There are many examples of these with concrete evidence. Like some of
the participants rumored to be seen as extras in soap operas quite
often.

Likewise, officials of Turkey's first and only marriage agency said they
declined an offer from the producers requesting access to their
portfolio.

Even though every TV show is a design, it shouldn't contradict with its
claim. Marriage shows claim they set out from the attendance of real
people planning their futures', however there are rumors going around
contradicting that. There is a fiction here with every aspect of it.
This fiction is aimed to keep these shows on air as long as possible.

Serap Öztürk's article has this to say about "Evlilik
Programları/Show'ları" (Marriage Programs/Shows) "This staged show
receiving disapproval from the individuals of the society continues to
be a point of interest. Comments from the audience and the experts of
the fiction and nonfiction concept, adds life to the show. Life is the
experience of past things. It is possible to determine this clash of
personal differences concept on screen is more damaging than any good.
Is it impossible to understand the participants extra time to free time?
To think staged scenes reflect the reality of life is the real
inexperience."[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_9]

As this is the situation, we can say effort to maintain these program
are not in line with their ratings and advertising revenues.

### Parallels Between the TV Show and Online Dating Sites in Turkey

## CONCLUSION

In the beginning of the article we proposed that it is difficult to
understand the subject of marriage shows without examining the topics,
institution of marriage in Turkish society, media influence and the
restructuring of society.

We will continue to have different results as long as new data, on the
effect of media on society, is gathered. As 'New Media' enters the lives
of younger people as a more decisive and an effective communication
model this is especially true. However, it is an irrefutable fact that
society's mutual cultural values have a much higher priority to set its
own level of consciousness.

As the understanding, thought, belief, tradition, cultural remains of
old way of producing loses their dominance, they don't go away and they
haven't.[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_10]

Sovereign powers have many practical strategies for their own
management, to gain the consent of people under their dominance. We call
this hegemony for short. What the sovereign power wants to do, is to
make the other part of society to accept their values. They tend to do
this by their consent. Military coup in September 12 1981 and aftermath
of it is the most apparent indication of this. Media is one of the most
important instruments for this and becomes successful often in
short-term operations.

Young population showed their discomfort of the oppressive structure in
Gezi Park Protests, which started in İstanbul in June 2013 and quickly
spread to all of Turkey in a short amount of time.

In a survey done by Foundation for Political, Economic and Social
Research (SETA) in 2007 on 2727 subjects, some questions have been asked
about the preservation of cultural values that constitute the identity
of Turkish society.

Results of the survey are very striking and contradictory to what is
being claimed on television.


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- ------------
                                                                                                               Number   Percentage
  Cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in Turkey should be preserved.                2489     %91,3
  There is no need to preserve the cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in Turkey.   80       %2,9
  No opinion.                                                                                                  158      %5,8
  Total                                                                                                        2727     %100
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- ------------

Opinions About the Preservation of Cultural Values that Constitute the Mutual Identity of Turkish Society in Turkey (Which of the Two Options are Closer to Your Opinions Below?)
Source : Seta, October 2011

* While 91,3 percentage of the total subjects think cultural values that
constitute the mutual identity of society in Turkey should be preserved,
2,9 percentage think there is no need for it.


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- -------------- ------------
                                                                                                               Low Level   Medium Level   High Level
  Cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in Turkey should be preserved.                %90,6       %92,3          %94,2
  There is no need to preserve the cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in Turkey.   %2,8        %3,7           %2,7
  No opinion.                                                                                                  %6,6        %4,3           %3,1
  Total                                                                                                        %100        %100           %100
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- -------------- ------------


Opinions About the Preservation of Cultural Values that Constitute the Mutual Identity of Turkish Society in Turkey (Distribution by Level of Education)
Source : Seta, October 2011

* While 90,6% of the participants who have low level education, think
that cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in
Turkey should be preserved, 2,8% of them said there is no need for it.

* While 92,3% of the participants who have medium level education, think
that cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in
Turkey should be preserved, 3,4% of them said there is no need for it.

* While 94,2% of the participants who have high level education, think
that cultural values that constitute the mutual identity of society in
Turkey should be preserved, 2,7% of them said there is no need for it.

* A homogeneous spread is seen in all categories.

As we can understand from the survey, Turkish society defends their
cultural values with an overwhelming majority, furthermore this opinion
gets more popular as the level of education increases.

Again, from the same survey, it becomes clear that the Turkish people
have a negative opinion about marriage shows.


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- ------------
                                                                                                                     Number   Percentage
  I think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.         2156     %79,1
  I don't think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.   395      %14,5
  No opinion.                                                                                                        177      %6,5
  Total.                                                                                                             2727     %100
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- ------------

Opinions About the Effects of Marriage Shows on Family Structure and Marital Relationships (Which of the Two Options are Closer to Your Opinions Below?)
Source : Seta, October 2011


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------
                                                                                                                     Female   Male
  I think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.         %76,7    %81,5
  I don't think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.   %15      %12,9
  No opinion.                                                                                                        %7,3     %5,6
  Total.                                                                                                             2727     100,0
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------

Opinions About the Effects of Marriage Shows on Family Structure and Marital Relationships (Distribution by Gender)
Source : Seta, October 2011


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- -------------- ------------
                                                                                                                     Low Level   Medium Level   High Level
  I think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.         %77,5       %80,1          %88,8
  I don't think, marriage shows on TV has a negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.   %15,5       %13,2          %9,3
  No opinion.                                                                                                        %7,0        %6,7           %1,9
  Total.                                                                                                             %100        %100           %100
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- -------------- ------------

Opinions About the Effects of Marriage Shows on Family Structure and Marital Relationships (Distribution by Level of Education)
Source : Seta, October 2011

• 77,5% of low level educated, 80,1% of medium level educated and 88,8%
of high level educated, said that they think marriage shows on TV has a
negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.

• 15,5% of low level educated, 13,2% of medium level educated and 9,3%
of high level educated, said that they think marriage shows on TV has a
negative effect on Turkish family structure and marital relationships.

• As the education level increases, rate of people who think marriage
shows on TV having a negative effect on Turkish family structure and
marital relationships steadily increases.

• As the level of education increases, people who have no opinion about
the subject steadily decreases. It is thought to be because of the
correlation between higher education and awareness, that this percentage
is very low.

Expert Psychologist Çiğdem Demirsoy, gave a statement in Yeni Şafak
newspaper about marriage shows claiming, "Perception and expectations
about marriage are shaped by family and close social circles. That is
why I don't believe these shows have a direct impact on the institution
of marriage and the establishment of family". Therefore stating,
marriage shows have no interest in claiming or presenting anything
different about couples meeting and getting married.

Fears and concerns about marriage shows are focused on the argument of
them breaking the structure of society. It seems no one intends to
change the definitive structure and the traditional rules of marriage,
against these fears. Any sexual revolution that hints at a new form of
social structure looks to be far away for now. Besides, softened corners
of marriage with accordance to today's conditions are far from the level
of fiction in marriage shows.

Participants of these shows are thought to be uneducated, desperate,
have nothing better to do and doing it for the money or for being
famous. They are accepted as a part of a television show for most of the
viewers.

If we rewind and take a look;

A society bound to its tradition but open to change by the present

Debatable effect of media,

Are put to one side,

Then, if we combine these together with the effort to put these shows on
air, even with low advertisement revenues and ratings, same question
emerges. What could be the reason for this effort?

Answer of this question, should be given with the shows that couldn't be
broadcasted. How so? The real impact these shows have on society is to
generate distrust. Real trust issue here, lies with the media imposing
shows with questionable content to people instead of informing people to
create a democratic and free society. Distrust would be focused on the
media, which uses its resources to steal your time and ask for your
money in return.

Media, wants us to accept the featureless content by broadcasting shows
that people wouldn't request back and fade away from memory if they get
cancelled. However the no matter the age, gender and level of education,
audience is well aware of everything; to not to trust "what should be
trusted" is what is being tried to be created. In short, media wants us
to become "things".

As Terry Eagleton said, "Reification fragments and dislocates our social
experience, so that under its influence we forget that society is a
collective process and come see it instead merely as this or that
isolated object or institution". [^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_11]

While Turkish televisions reserve an important part of their broadcast
hours to these hollow shows even though there is no demand, news
programs are spreading disinformation, doing their part of the society
engineering so to speak. In June's great resistance, "Revolution will
not be televised" slogan people wrote on walls shows the current state
of Turkish television. Public couldn't watch a big uprising from their
television, CNN Türk showed a penguin documentary instead of
broadcasting this big event. In the long run, marriage shows are doing
what that penguin documentary did. What this policy has under it is the
reaction against dominant power, once the natural progression of society
is restored.

The media tycoons know doing their responsibilities would make it
difficult for the capitalist system to continue, so they put
sensationalist shows on air, keeping people busy thus putting what
shouldn't be to the place of what should be. These shows are not the
only option. Numbers indicate that these shows are not bringing revenues
or ratings as they make it out to be.

Social construct of Turkish society is evident. Building its future
while progressing its own traditional structure with education, science
and under the light of modernity. Every part of society actually knows
the media and not their minds are stealing their time. Media is stubborn
and determined to steal this time. The breaking point starts here; this
point is the distrust, media causes by abusing their authority,
demanding your time and money. Others will replace today's marriage
shows. It is a fully intentional policy of media to ignore the
political, social and economic conflicts and follow a straight path.

It is clear as day that people who watch these shows won't set their
future accordingly and take what is happening there as a reference and
the media tycoons are aware of that. Yet the sociological implication
the TV shows set for the type of atmosphere has also seeped into the
online dating and marriage websites. The marriage websites are designed
exactly like the programs; <http://www.evlilikmerkezi.com> states on its
welcome page: "… our biggest advantage is that all our users are here to
get married". This statement was also uttered in the opening of almost
all the TV shows.

Another similarity of the TV shows with the marriage websites is the
economical emphasis. During the shows, the candidate would be asked
about their income several times to ensure that the person to marry him
or her would benefit from the marriage. Online marriage sites such as
memurevlilik.net is based upon the fact that all its users are working
for a government institution.

These factors in the TV shows clearly have set the stage for online
marriage and dating sites. The expectations of the users are categorized
according to the standards set by the marriage TV shows.

## REFERENCES

Alemdar, Korkmaz-Erdoğan, İrfan, 'Popüler Kültür ve İletişim', Ankara,
Ümit Yayıncılık, 1994.

Avcı, Nazmi. Toplumsal değerler ve Gençlik. Siyasal Kitabevi, 2007.

Eagleton, Terry, İdeoloji (Ideology;An Introduction) (Trans .Muttalip
Özcan), Ayrıntı Yayınları, 1991, p. 140.

Gramsci, Antonio. *Prison Notebooks. Vol. 2*. Columbia: Columbia University Press,
1996.

Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno. *Dialectic of enlightenment:
Philosophical fragments*. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002.

Katz, Elihu, Jay G. Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch. 'Uses and
gratifications research.' *Public Opinion Quarterly* (1973): 509-523.

Postman, Neil, *'Televizyon: Öldüren Eğlence, Gösteri Çağında Kamusal
Söylem'*, Osman Akınhay (trans.), İstanbul: Ayrıntı Yayınları, 1985, p.
34.

Yusuf Akçura, A. Kemal and A. Ferit. 'Üç tarz-ı siyaset' (Vol. 73). Türk
Tarih Kurumu Basımevi. 1976.

Oncevatan. <http://www.oncevatan.com.tr/>.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_1]: Alemdar, Korkmaz-Erdoğan, İrfan, 'Popüler Kültür ve İletişim', Ankara, Ümit Yayıncılık, 1994, p. 149.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_2]: Yusuf Akçura, A. Kemal and A. Ferit. 'Üç tarz-ı siyaset' (Vol. 73). Türk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi. 1976.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_3]: Yusuf Akçura, A. Kemal and A. Ferit. 'Üç tarz-ı siyaset'.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_4]: Gramsci, Antonio. Prison Notebooks. Vol. 2. Columbia University
    Press, 1996.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_5]: Avcı, Nazmi. Toplumsal değerler ve Gençlik. Siyasal Kitabevi,
    2007.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_6]: Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno. Dialectic of
    enlightenment: Philosophical fragments. Stanford University Press,
    2002.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_7]: Postman, Neil, 'Televizyon: Öldüren Eğlence, Gösteri Çağında
    Kamusal Söylem', Osman Akınhay (trans.), İstanbul: Ayrıntı
    Yayınları, 1985, p. 34

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_8]: Katz, Elihu, Jay G. Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch. 'Uses and
    gratifications research.' Public opinion quarterly (1973): 509-523.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_9]: Oncevatan. <http://www.oncevatan.com.tr/>.

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_10]: Alemdar, Korkmaz-Erdoğan, İrfan, 'Popüler Kültür ve İletişim',
    Ankara, Ümit Yayıncılık, 1994, p. 263

[^18_TVshows-ozustun-Final_11]: Eagleton, Terry, İdeoloji (Ideology; An Introduction) (Trans
    .Muttalip Özcan), Ayrıntı Yayınları, 1991, p. 140
